6
1
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
1
 
 
]
E
N
.
s
c
[
 
 
2
v
0
5
7
1
0
.
7
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Formal Deﬁnitions of Unbounded Evolution and
Innovation Reveal Universal Mechanisms for
Open-Ended Evolution in Dynamical Systems

Alyssa Adams1,2,3, Hector Zenil3,4,5, Paul C.W. Davies1, and Sara Imari Walker1,6,7,8,*

1Beyond Center for Fundamental Concepts in Science, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
2Department of Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
3Algorithmic Nature Group, LABORES, Paris, France
4Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford UK
5Unit of Computational Medicine, SciLifeLab, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm
Sweden
6School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
7ASU-SFI Center for Biosocial Complex Systems, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
8Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Seattle WA USA
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: sara.i.walker@asu.edu

ABSTRACT

Open-ended evolution (OEE) is relevant to a variety of biological, artiﬁcial and technological systems, but has been challenging
to reproduce in silico. Most theoretical efforts focus on key aspects of open-ended evolution as it appears in biology. We recast
the problem as a more general one in dynamical systems theory, providing simple criteria for open-ended evolution based on
two hallmark features: unbounded evolution and innovation. We deﬁne unbounded evolution as patterns that are non-repeating
within the expected Poincar ´e recurrence time of an equivalent isolated system, and innovation as trajectories not observed
in isolated systems. As a case study, we implement novel variants of cellular automata (CA) in which the update rules are
allowed to vary with time in three alternative ways. Each is capable of generating conditions for open-ended evolution, but vary
in their ability to do so. We ﬁnd that state-dependent dynamics, widely regarded as a hallmark of life, statistically out-performs
other candidate mechanisms, and is the only mechanism to produce open-ended evolution in a scalable manner, essential to
the notion of ongoing evolution. This analysis suggests a new framework for unifying mechanisms for generating OEE with
features distinctive to life and its artifacts, with broad applicability to biological and artiﬁcial systems.

Introduction

Many real-world biological and technological systems display rich dynamics, often leading to increasing complexity over time
that is limited only by resource availability. A prominent example is the evolution of biological complexity: the history of life on
Earth has displayed a trend of continual evolutionary adaptation and innovation, giving rise to an apparent open-ended increase
in the complexity of the biosphere over its > 3.5 billion year history1. Other complex systems, from the growth of cities2, to
the evolution of language3, culture4, 5 and the Internet6 appear to exhibit similar trends of innovation and open-ended dynamics.
Producing computational models that generate sustained patterns of innovation over time is therefore an important goal in
modeling complex systems as a necessary step on the path to elucidating the fundamental mechanisms driving open-ended
dynamics in both natural and artiﬁcial systems. If successful, such models hold promise for new insights in diverse ﬁelds
ranging from biological evolution to artiﬁcial life and artiﬁcial intelligence.

Despite the signiﬁcance of realizing open-ended evolution in theoretical models, progress in this direction has been hindered
by lack of a universally accepted deﬁnition for open-ended evolution (OEE). Although relevant to many ﬁelds, OEE is most
often discussed in the context of artiﬁcial life, where the problem is so fundamental that it has been dubbed a “millennium
prize problem”7. Many working deﬁnitions exist, which can be classiﬁed into four hallmark categories as outlined by Banzhaf
et al.8: (1) on-going innovation and generation of novelty9, 10; (2) unbounded evolution1, 11, 12; (3) on-going production of
complexity13–15; (4) a deﬁning feature of life16. Each of these faces its own challenges, as each is cast in terms of equally
ambiguous concepts. For example, the concepts of “innovation” or “novelty”, “complexity” and “life” are all notoriously
difﬁcult to formalize in their own right. It is also not apparent whether “unbounded evolution” is physically possible since
real systems are limited in their dynamics by ﬁnite resources, ﬁnite time, and ﬁnite space. A further challenge is identifying
whether the diverse concepts of OEE are driving at qualitatively different phenomena, or whether they might be uniﬁed within a

common conceptual framework. For example, it has been suggested that increasing complexity might not itself be a hallmark
of OEE, but instead a consequence of it9, 16. Likewise, processes may appear unbounded, even within a ﬁnite space, if they can
continually produce novelty within observable dynamical timescales17.

Given these limitations, it was unclear if OEE is a property unique to life, is inclusive of its artifacts (such as technology),
or if it is an even broader phenomenon that could be a universal property of certain classes of dynamical systems. Many
approaches aimed at addressing the hallmarks of OEE have been inspired by biology17, primarily because biological evolution
is the best known example of a real-world system with the potential to be truly open-ended1. However, as stated, other examples
of potentially open-ended complex systems do exist, such as trends associated with cultural4, 5 and technological2, 6 growth, and
other creative processes. Therefore, herein we set out to develop a more general framework to seek links between the four
aforementioned hallmarks of OEE within dynamical systems, while remaining agnostic about their precise implementation in
biology. Our motivation is to discover universal mechanisms that underlie OEE as it might occur both within and outside of
biological evolution.

In dynamical systems theory there exists a natural bound on the complexity that can be generated by a ﬁnite deterministic
process, which is given by the Poincar´e recurrence time. Roughly, the Poincar´e time is the maximal time after which any
ﬁnite system returns to its initial state and its dynamical trajectory repeats. Clearly, new dynamical patterns cannot occur past
the Poincar´e time if the system is isolated from external perturbations. To cast the concept of unbounded evolution ﬁrmly
within dynamical systems theory, we introduce a formal minimal criteria for unbounded evolution (where we stress that here
we mean the broader concept of dynamical evolution, not just evolution in the biological sense) in ﬁnite dynamical systems:
minimally, an unbounded system is one that does not repeat within the expected Poincar´e time. A key feature is that this
deﬁnition automatically excludes ﬁnite deterministic systems unless they are open to external perturbations in some way. That
is, we contend that unbounded evolution (and in turn OEE which depends on it) is only possible for subsystem interacting
with an external environment. To make better contact with real-world systems, where the Poincar´e time often cannot even in
principle be observed, we introduce a second criteria of innovation. Systems satisfying the minimal deﬁnition of unbounded
evolution must also satisfy a formal notion of innovation, where we deﬁne innovation as dynamical trajectories not observed in
isolated, unperturbed systems. We identify innovation by comparison to counterfactual histories (those of isolated systems).
Like unbounded evolution, innovation is extrinsically deﬁned and requires interaction between at least two subsystems. A given
subsystem can exhibit OEE if only if it is both unbounded and innovative. As we will show, utilizing this criteria for OEE
allows us to evaluate candidate mechanisms for generating OEE in simple toy model dynamical systems, ones that could carry
over to more realistic complex dynamical systems.

The utility of these deﬁnitions is that they provide a simple way to quantify intuition regarding hallmarks (1) and (2) of
OEE for systems of ﬁnite size, which is applicable to any comparable dynamical system. They therefore provide a means
to quantitatively evaluate, and therefore directly compare, different potential mechanisms for generating OEE. We apply
these deﬁnitions to test three new variants of cellular automata (CA) for their capacity to generate OEE. A key feature of the
new variants introduced is their implementation of time-dependent update rules, which represents a radical departure from
more traditional approaches to dynamical systems where the dynamical laws remain ﬁxed. Each variant introduced differs
in its relative openness to an external environment. Of the variants tested, our results indicate that systems that implement
time-dependent rules that are a function of their state are statistically better at satisfying the two criteria for OEE than dynamical
systems with externally driven time-dependence for their rules (that is where the rule evolution is not dependent on the state of
the subsystem of interest). We show that the state-dependent systems provide a mechanism for generating OEE that includes
the capacity for on-going production of novelty by coupling to larger environments. This mechanism is also scales with system
size, meaning the amount of open-endedness that is generated does not drop off as the system size increases. We then explore
the complexity of state-dependent systems in more depth, calculating general complexity measures including compressibility
(based on LZW in18) and Lyapunov exponents. Given that state-dependent dynamics are often cited as a hallmark feature of
life due to the role of self-reference in biological processes19–22, our results provide a new connection between hallmarks (1),
(2) and (4) of OEE. Our results therefore connect several hallmarks of OEE in a new framework that allows identiﬁcation of
mechanisms that might operate in a diverse range of dynamical systems. The framework holds promise for providing insights
into universal mechanisms for generating OEE in dynamical systems, which is applicable to both biological and artiﬁcial
systems.

Theory

Traditionally dynamical systems, like their physical counterparts, are modeled with ﬁxed dynamical laws – a legacy from the
time of Newton. However, this framework may not be the appropriate one for modeling biological complexity, where the
dynamical laws appear to be self-referential and evolve in time as a function of the states19–22. An explicit example is the
feedback between genotype and phenotype within a cell: genes are “read-out” to produce changes to the state of expressed
proteins and RNAs, and these in turn can feedback to turn individual genes on and off23. Given this connection to biology, we

2/37

are motivated in this work to focus explicitly on time-dependent rules, where time-dependence is introduced by driving the rule
evolution through coupling to an external environment. Since open-ended evolution has been challenging to characterize in
traditional models with ﬁxed dynamical rules, implementing time-dependent rules could open new pathways to generating
complexity. In this study we therefore deﬁne open systems as those where the rule dynamically evolves as a function of time,
and we assume this is driven by interaction with an environment. As we show, time-dependent rules allow novel trajectories to
be realized that have not been previously characterized in cellular automata models. To quantify this novelty, we introduce a
rigorous notion of OEE that relies on formalized deﬁnitions of unbounded evolution and innovation. The deﬁnitions presented
rely on utilizing isolated systems evolved according to a ﬁxed rule as a set of counterfactual systems to compare to the novel
dynamics driven by time-dependent rules.

Formalizing Open-Ended Evolution as Unbounded Evolution and Innovation
A hallmark feature of open-ended evolutionary systems is that they appear unbounded in their dynamical evolution1, 11, 12. For
ﬁnite systems, such as those we encounter in the real world, the concept of “unbounded” is not well-deﬁned. In part this is
because all ﬁnite systems will eventually repeat, as captured by the well-known Poincar´e recurrence theorem. As stated in the
theorem, ﬁnite systems are bounded by their Poincar´e recurrence time, which is the maximal time after which a system will
start repeating its prior evolution. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of a ﬁnite, closed deterministic dynamical system therefore
provides a natural bound on when one should expect such a system to stop producing novelty. In other words, tp is an absolute
upper-bound on when such a system will terminate any appearance of open-endedness.

Potentially the Poincar´e recurrence theorem can locally be violated by a subsystem with open boundary conditions or if the
subsystem is stochastic (although in the latter case the system might still be expected to approximately repeat). We therefore
consider a deﬁnition of unbounded evolution applicable to any instance of a dynamical system that can be decomposed into
two interacting subsystems. Nominally, we refer to these two interacting subsystems as the “organism” (o) and “environment”
(e). We note that our framework is sufﬁciently general to apply to systems outside of biology: the concept of “organism” is
meant only to stress that we expect this subsystem to potentially exhibit the rich dynamics intuitively anticipated of OEE when
coupled to an environment (the environment, by contrast, is not expected to produce OEE behavior). The purpose of the second
“environment” subsystem is to explicitly introduce external perturbations to the organism, where e is also part of the larger
system under investigation and modulates the rule of o in a time-dependent manner. We therefore minimally deﬁne unbounded
evolution (UE) as occurring when a sub-partition of a dynamical system does not repeat within its expected Poincar´e recurrence
time, giving the appearance of unbounded dynamics for given ﬁnite resources:

Deﬁnition 1 Unbounded evolution (UE): A system U that can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e,
exhibits unbounded evolution if there exists a recurrence time such that the state-trajectory or the rule-trajectory of o is
non-repeating for tr > tP or t(cid:48)
r the recurrence time of the rules,
and tP is the Poincar´e recurrence time for an equivalent isolated (non-perturbed) system o.

r > tP respectively, where tr is the recurrence time of the states, t(cid:48)

Since we consider o where the states and rules evolve in time, unbounded evolution can apply to the state or rule trajectory
recurrence time and still satisfy Deﬁnition 1. That is, a dynamical system exhibits UE if and only if it can be partitioned such
that the sequence of one of its subsystems’ states or dynamical rules are non-repeating within the expected Poincar´e recurrence
time tP of an equivalent isolated system. In other words, unbounded evolution is only possible in a system that is partitioned
into at least two interacting subsystems. This way, one of the subsystems acts as an external driver for the rule evolution of the
other subsystem, which can then be pushed past its expected maximal recurrence time, tP. We calculate the expected tP as
that of an equivalent isolated system. By equivalent isolated system, we mean the set of all possible trajectories evolved from
any initial state drawn from the same set possible of states as for o, but generated with a ﬁxed rule, which can be any possible
ﬁxed rule. We will describe explicit examples using the Elementary Cellular Automata (ECA) rule space in Section Model
Implementation, where the relevant set of states are those constructed from the binary alphabet {0, 1} and the set of rules for
comparison are the ECA rules. ECA are deﬁned as 1-dimensional CA with nearest-neighbor update rules: for an ECA of width
w (number of cells across), equivalent isolated systems as deﬁned here include all trajectories evolved with any ﬁxed ECA rule
from any initial state of width w, where tP is then tP = 2w and w = wo, where wo is the width of o.

Implementing the above deﬁnition of UE necessarily depends on counterfactual histories of isolated systems (e.g. of ECA
in our examples). These counterfactual systems cannot, by deﬁnition, generate conditions for UE. This suggests as a corollary a
natural deﬁnition for innovation in terms of comparison to the same set of counterfactual histories:

Deﬁnition 2 Innovation (INN): A system U that can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e exhibits
innovation if there exists a recurrence time tr such that the state-trajectory is not contained in the set of all possible state
trajectories for an equivalent isolated (non-perturbed) system.

3/37

Figure 1. State diagrams: A hypothetical example demonstrating the concepts of INN and UE. The possible set of states are
S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and rules R = {α, β }. For each panel, the example state trajectory s is initialized with starting state so = 3.
For panels c and d the rule trajectory r is also shown. Highlighted in bold is the ﬁrst iteration of the attractor for states (all
panels) or rules (panel c and d only). For a discrete deterministic system of six states, the Poincar´e recurrence time is tP = 6.
Panel (a) shows the state transition diagram for hypothetical rule α where a trajectory initialized at s(t0) = 3 visits two states.
Panel (b) shows the state transition diagram for hypothetical rule β where a trajectory initialized at s(t0) = 3 visits only one
state. Since the trajectories in (a) and (b) evolve according to a ﬁxed rule (are isolated) they do not display INN or UE and in
general the recurrence time tr (cid:28) tP. Panel (c) demonstrates INN, where the trajectory shown cannot be fully described by rule
α or rule β alone. The state trajectory s and rule trajectory r both have a recurrence time of tr = 5, which is less than tP so this
example does not exhibit UE. Panel (d) exhibits UE (and is also an example of INN). The trajectory shown cannot be described
by rule α or rule β alone. The recurrence time for the state trajectory is tr = 13, which is greater than tP. The rule trajectory
also satisﬁes the conditions for UE, with a recurrence time in this example that is longer than that of the state trajectory due to
the fact that the state transition 2 → 5 could be driven by rule α or β depending on the coupling to an external system.

4/37

That is, a subsystem o exhibits INN by Deﬁnition 2 if its dynamics are not contained within the set of all possible trajectories
of equivalent isolated systems. We note these deﬁnitions do not necessitate that the complexity of individual states increase with
time, thus one might observe INN without a corresponding rise in complexity with time. Fig. 1 shows a conceptual illustration
of both UE and INN, as presented in Deﬁnitions 1 and 2.

A motivation for including both Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 is that they encompass intuitive notions of “on-going production of
novelty” (INN) and “unbounded evolution” (UE), both of which are considered important hallmarks of OEE8. UE can imply
INN, but INN does not likewise imply UE. It might therefore appear that UE is sufﬁcient to characterize OEE without needing
to appeal to separately deﬁning INN. The utility of including INN in our formalism is that it allows generalization to both
inﬁnite systems where UE is not deﬁned, and to real-world systems where UE is not physically observable (since, for example,
tP could in principle be longer than the age of the universe). For the latter, INN can be an approximation to UE, where higher
values of INN indicate a system more likely to exhibit UE (see Fig. 7). Additionally, the combination of UE and INN can be
used to exclude cases that appear unbounded but are only trivially so. For example, a partition of a system evolved according
to a ﬁxed dynamical rule could in principle locally satisfy UE, but would not satisfy INN since its dynamics could be shown
to be equivalent to those generated from an appropriately constructed isolated system (e.g. a larger ECA in our example).
An example is the time evolution of ECA Rule 3024, which is known to be a ‘complex’ ECA rule that continually generates
novel patterns under open-boundary conditions. In cases such as this, it should be considered that it is the complexity at the
open boundary of the system that is generating continual novelty and not a mechanism internal to the system itself. In other
words, in such examples the complexity is generated by the boundary conditions. Since our biosphere has simple, relatively
homogeneous boundary conditions (geochemical and radiative energy sources) the complexity of the biosphere likely arises
due to internal mechanisms and is not trivially generated by the boundary conditions alone25. Since we aim to understand
the intrinsic mechanisms that might drive OEE in real, ﬁnite dynamical systems, we therefore require both deﬁnitions to be
satisﬁed for a dynamical system to exhibit non-trivial OEE.

Model implementation
We evaluate different mechanisms for generating OEE against Deﬁnitions 1 and 2, utilizing the rule space of Elementary
Cellular Automata (ECA) as a case study. ECA are deﬁned as nearest-neighbor 1-dimensional CA operating on the two-bit
alphabet {0, 1}. There are 256 possible ECA rules, and since the rule numbering is arbitrary, we label them according to
Wolfram’s heuristic designation24. Due to their relative simplicity, ECA represent some of the most widely-studied CA, thus
providing a well-characterized foundation for this study. Traditionally, ECA evolve according to a ﬁxed dynamical rule starting
from a speciﬁed initial state. As such, no isolated ﬁnite ECA can meet both of the criteria laid out in Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 as per
our construction aimed at excluding trivial cases. An isolated ECA of width w will repeat its pattern of states by the Poincar´e
time tP = 2w (violating Deﬁnition 1). If we instead considered a CA of width w as a subsystem of a larger ECA it would not
necessarily repeat within 2w time steps, but it would not be innovative (violating Deﬁnition 2). Thus, as stated, we can exclude
trivial examples such as ECA Rule 30, or other unbounded but non-innovative dynamical processes, which repeatedly apply the
same update rule. A list of model parameters are summarized in Table 1.

To exclude trivial unbounded cases, Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 are constructed to require that the dynamical rules themselves
evolve in time. As we will show, utilizing the set of 256 possible ECA rules as the rule space for CA with time-dependent rules
makes both UE and INN possible. Rules can be stochastically or deterministically evolved, and we explore both mechanisms
here. We note that there exists a huge number of possible variants one might consider. We therefore focus on three variants that
display important mechanisms implicated in generating OEE, including openness to an environment10 (of varying degrees in all
three variants), state-dependent dynamics (regarded as a hallmark feature of life19, 21, 22), and stochasticity. Here openness to an
environment is parameterized by the degree to which the rule evolution of o depends on the state (or rule) of o, as compared to
its dependence on the state of e. Completely open systems are regarded as depending only on external factors, such that the
time-dependence of the rule evolution is only a function of the environment. We also consider cases that are only partially open,
where the rule evolution depends on both extrinsic and intrinsic factors.

Case I
The ﬁrst variant, Case I, implements state-dependent update rules, such that the evolution of o depends on its own state and that
of its environment. This is intended to provide a model that captures the hypothesized self-referential dynamics underlying
biological systems (see e.g. Goldenfeld and Woese21) while also being open to an environment (we do not consider closed
self-referential systems herein as treated in Pavlic et al since these do not permit the possibility of UE26). We consider two
coupled subsystems o and e, where the update rule of o is state-dependent and is a function the state and rule of o, and the
state of e at the same time t (thus being self-referential but also open to perturbations from an external system). That is, the
update rule of o takes on the functional form ro(t + 1) = f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)), where so and ro are the state and rule of the
organism respectively, and se is the state of the environment. We regard this case as only partly open to an environment since
the evolution of the rule of o depends on its own state (and rule) in addition to the state of its environment. By contrast, the

5/37

Table 1. Table of terms and model parameters.

Parameter Deﬁnition

o
e
so
ro
se
wo
we
tP
tr
t(cid:48)
r
I
µ
ξ
C
k

Single organism execution
Single environment execution
state of o
rule of o
state of e
width of o
width of e
Poincar´e recurrence time
Recurrence time of so
Recurrence time of ro
Innovation calculated as the normalized number of rule transitions
Mutation threshold of Case III variant µ = [0, 1)
random noise for Case III variant, ξ = [0, 1)
Compressibility
Lyapunov exponent

subsystem e is closed to external perturbation and evolves according to a ﬁxed rule (such that e is an ECA ). Both o and e
have periodic boundary conditions (o is only open in the sense that its rule evolution is in part externally driven). A schematic
illustration of the time evolution of an ECA, and the coupling between subsystems in a Case I CA is shown in Figure 2.

To demonstrate how the organism in our example of a Case I CA changes its update rule, we provide a simple illustrative
example of the particular function f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)) implemented in this work (see 3 and Supplement 1.1). Speciﬁcally, we
utilize an update function that takes advantage of the binary representation of ECA. An example of the structure of an ECA rule
is shown for Rule 30 in Fig. 2. ECA rules are structured such that each successive bit in the binary representation of the rule is
the output of one of the 23 possible ordered sets of triplet states. The left panel of Fig. 3 shows an example of a few times
steps of the evolution of an organism o of width wo = 4 (right) coupled to an environment e with width we = 6 (left), where o
implemented rule 30 at t − 1. At each time-step t the frequency of each of the 23 ordered triplet states (listed in the top row of
Fig. 2) in the state of o is compared to the frequency of the same ordered triplet in the state of e. If the frequency in o meets or
exceeds the frequency in e for a given triplet, the bit corresponding to the output of that triplet in the rule of o is ﬂipped from
0 ↔ 1. For the example in the left panel of Fig. 3, the triplet frequencies are listed in the table in the right panel of Fig. 3. We
note that for our implementation, the frequency of a triplet in o is calculated relative to the total number of possible triplets in
so, which is 4 in this example (and likewise for e, with 6 possible triplets in the current state). We compare the frequency only
for those triplets that appear in the state of o at time t. In the table, only the triplet 101 is expressed more frequently in the
organism o than in the environment e. The interaction between o and e changes ro from Rule 30 at time-step t to Rule 62 at
t + 1, as shown in Fig. 3. The rule may change by more than one bit in its binary representation in a single time step if multiple
triplets meet the criteria to change the organism’s update rule.

We note that we do not expect the qualitative features of Case I CA reported here to depend on the precise form of the
state-dependent update rule as presented, so long as the update of ro depends on the state and rule of o, and the state of e (that
is, o is self-referential and open – see Pavlic et al.26 for an example of non-open self-referencing CA that does not display UE).
We explored some variants to this rule-changing mechanism. None of our variants signiﬁcantly changed the statistics of the
results, indicating that the qualitative features of the dynamics do not depend on the exact (and somewhat parochial) details
of the example presented herein. Instead, we regard the important part to be the general feature of self-reference coupled to
openness to an environment that is driving the interesting features of the dynamics observed, where we can focus on just one
example in this study for computational tractability in generating large ensemble statistics. The example implemented here was
chosen since it takes explicit advantage of the structure of ECA rules (by ﬂipping bits in the rule table) to provide a simple,
open state-dependent mechanism for producing interesting dynamics.

Case II
We introduce a second variant of CA, Case II, that is similarly composed of two spatially segregated, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional
CA: an organism o and an environment e. As with Case I, the environment e is an execution of an ECA, and is evolved
according to a ﬁxed rule drawn from the set of 256 possible ECA rules. The key difference between Case I and Case II CA is

6/37

Figure 2. Illustrations of the time evolution of a standard ECA (left) and of a Case I state-dependent CA (right). ECA evolve
according to a ﬁxed update rule (here Rule 30), with the same rule implemented at each time step. In an ECA rule table, the cell
representation of all possible binary ordered triplets is shown in the top row, with the cell representation of the corresponding
mapping arising from Rule 30 shown below. Rule 30 therefore has the binary representation 00011110. In a Case I CA (right),
the environment subsystem e evolves exactly like an ECA with a ﬁxed rule. The organism subsystem o, by contrast, updates its
rule at each time-step depending on its rule at the previous time-step, its own state (green arrows) and the state of e (red arrows).
The new rule for o is then implemented to update the state of o (blue arrows). The rules are therefore time-dependent in a
manner that is a function of the states of o and e and the past history of o (through the dependence on the rule at the previous
time-step).

7/37

Figure 3. Example of the implementation of a Case I organism in our example. Shown is an organism o of width wo = 4,
coupled to an environment e with width we = 6, where the rule of o at time step t is ro(t) = 30. (a) At each time step t, the
frequency of ordered triplets are compared in the state of the organism and that of the environment, so and se respectively, and
used to update ro(t) → ro(t + 1) (see text for algorithm description). (b) Table of the calculated frequency of ordered triplets in
the state of the environment and in the state of the organism for time step t shown in the left panel. (c) Update of ro from Rule
30 to Rule 62, based on the frequency of triplets in the table (b).

8/37

that for Case II, the the update rule of the subsystem o depends only on the state of the external environment e and is therefore
independent of the current state or rule of o – that is, o is not self-referential in this example. Case II CA emulate systems
where the rules for dynamical evolution are modulated exclusively by the time evolution of an external system. We consider
o in this example to be more open to its environment than for Case I, since the rule evolution of o depends only on e. The
functional form of Case II rule evolution may be written as ro(t + 1) = f (se(t)), where ro is the rule of o and se is the state of
the environment (see Supplement 1.2). For the example presented here, we implement a map f that takes se(t) → ro(t) that is
1 : 1 from the state of e to the binary representation of the rule of o (determined according to Wolfram’s binary classiﬁcation
scheme). Therefore for the implementation of Case II in our example the environment must be of width we = 8.

Case III
The ﬁnal variant, Case III, is composed of a single, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional CA with periodic boundary conditions, which is
identiﬁed as the organism o. Like with Case II, the rule evolution of Case III is driven externally and does not depend on o.
However, here the external environment e is stochastic noise and not an ECA. The subsystem o has a time-dependent rule where
each bit in the rule table is ﬂipped with a probability µ (“mutation rate”) at each time step. In functional form, the subsystem o
updates its rule such that ro(t + 1) = f (ro(t), ξ ), where ro is the rule of o, and ξ is a random number drawn from the interval
[0, 1) (see Supplement 1.3). At each time step, for each bit in the rule table, a random number ξ is drawn, and if ξ is above a
threshold µ, that bit is ﬂipped 0 ↔ 1 at that time step. This implements a diffusive-random walk through ECA rule space. Since
the rule of o at time t + 1, ro(t + 1), depends on the rule at time t, ro(t), the dynamics of Case III CA are history-dependent in a
similar manner to Case I (both rely on ﬂipping bits in ro(t), where Case I do so deterministically as a function of so and se, and
Case III do so stochastically). In this example, o is also more open to its environment than in Case I since the organism’s rule
does not depend on so, but it is less open than Case II since the rule does depend on the previous organism rule used.

Table 2. Table of cellular automata variants, and the functional form of the rule evolution of o.

CA Variant
Case I
Case II
Case III
ECA (Isolated)

Environment, e
Organism Rule Evolution
ro(t + 1) = f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)) ECA, varied we
ro(t + 1) = f (se(t))
ro(t + 1) = f (ro(t), ξ )
ro(t + 1) = ro(t)

ECA, we = 8
Heat bath
None

All three variants are summarized in Table 2 (see Supplement 1), where the functional dependencies of the rule evolution in
each example are explicitly compared. Since we restrict the rule space for Cases I–III to that of ECA rules only, the trajectories
of ECA with periodic boundary conditions provides a well-deﬁned set of isolated counterfactual trajectories with which to
evaluate Deﬁnitions 1 and 2. For comparison to isolated systems, we evaluate all ECA of width wo, where wo is the width of
the “organism” subsystem o. We test the capacity for each of the three cases presented to generate OEE against Deﬁnitions 1
and 2 in a statistically rigorous manner, and compare the efﬁcacy of the different mechanisms implemented in each case.

Experimental Methods
For Cases I - III, we evolve o with periodic boundary conditions (such that interaction with the environment is only through
the rule evolution). For Cases I and II, e is also a CA with periodic boundary conditions. For Case I, where we must also be
speciﬁed, we consider systems with we = 1/2wo, wo, 3/2wo, 2wo and 5/2wo , where wo is the width o. For Case II, we = 8
for all simulations, since this permits a 1:1 map from the possible states of e to the rule space of ECA. Results for Case III
are given for organism rule mutation rate µ = 0.5, such that each outcome bit in the rule evolution has a 50% probability of
ﬂipping at every time step for ξ drawn from the interval [0, 1) (a bit ﬂips when µ > ξ ). Other values of µ were explored, with
qualitatively similar results (see Supplement Fig. S4).

The number of possible executions grows exponentially large with width wo, limiting the computational tractability of
statistically rigorous sampling. We therefore explored small CA with wo = 3, 4, . . . 7 and sampled a representative subspace of
each (see Supplement 2). For each system sampled, we measured the recurrence times of the rule (t(cid:48)
r) and state (tr) trajectories
for o. For Case III CA, which are stochastic, all simulations eventually terminated as a random oscillation between the all
‘0‘ state and the all ‘1‘ state. We therefore used the timescale of reaching this oscillatory attractor as a proxy for the state
recurrence time tr. In cases where tr > tP or t(cid:48)
o for isolated ECA (Deﬁnition 1), and the state trajectory was
not produced by any ECA execution of width wo (Deﬁnition 2), the system is considered to exhibit OEE.

r > tP, where tP = 2w

We measured the complexity of the resulting interactions by calculating relative compressibility, C, and by the system’s
sensitivity based upon Lyapunov exponents, k27 (see Supplement 8). Large values of C indicate low Kolmogorov-Chaitin
complexity, meaning the output can be produced by a simple (short) program. Large values of k indicate complex dynamics,
with trajectories that rapidly diverge for small perturbations such as occurs in deterministic chaos27. These values are compared

9/37

Table 3. Percentage of sampled cases displaying OEE (satisfying Deﬁnitions 1 and 2) for each CA variant. Rows are organism
width, wo, and columns correspond to the three different CA variants and ECA statistics.

wo ECA Case I (wo = we) Case II Case III
3
4
5
6
7

7.42
1.05
2.76
5.2 × 10−3
4.7 × 10−4

42.47
11.54
10.43
0.27
0.7

0.02
0.38
3.41
0.03
1.06

0
0
0
0
0

to those of ECA. Additionally, ECA rules are often categorized in terms of four Wolfram complexity classes, I - IV24. Class I
and II are considered simple because all initial patterns evolve quickly into a stable or oscillating, homogeneous state. Class
III and IV rules are viewed as generating more complex dynamics. We use the complexity classes of the rules utilized in
time-dependent rule evolution to determine whether the complexity of time-dependent CAs is a product of the ECA rules
implemented, or if it is generated through the mechanism of time-dependence.

Results

The vast majority of executions sampled from all three CA variants were innovative by Deﬁnition 2, with > 99% of Case II
and Case III CAs displaying INN. For Case I CA, the percentage of INN cases increased as a function of both wo and we,
ranging from ∼ 30% for the smallest CA explored to > 99% for larger systems (see Supplement 5). This is intuitive, since the
majority of organisms with changing updates rules should be expected to exhibit different state-trajectories than ECA. The
fact that > 99% of organisms are innovative in our examples may seem to indicate that INN is trivial. However, we note that
INN conceptually becomes more signiﬁcant when considering inﬁnite systems (where UE is not deﬁned) or large systems
where tP is not measurable (and thus UE cannot be calculated). We show below that INN scales with recurrence time, and the
amount of innovation is a good proxy for UE. INN is therefore useful to the analysis of large or inﬁnite systems where the
methods implemented here to detail candidate mechanisms are not directly applicable to test UE. INN is also necessary to
exclude trivial OEE. We also note that for computational tractability we compare the time evolution of o only to ECA, but in
practice one could (and perhaps should) compare o to dynamical systems evolved according to any ﬁxed rule (e.g. regardless of
neighborhood size, which for ECA is n = 3), in which case we might expect the number of INN cases to decrease and therefore
INN would be more non-trivial even for small systems.

By contrast to cases exhibiting INN, OEE cases are much rarer, even for our highly simpliﬁed examples, due to the fact that
the number of UE cases is much smaller, typically representing < 5% of all the sampled trajectories in the examples studied
here. We therefore focus discussion primarily on sampled executions meeting the criteria for OEE, i.e. those that satisﬁed
Deﬁnitions 1, before returning to how INN might approximate UE.

Open-Ended Evolution in CA variants.
The percentage of sampled cases for each CA variant that satisfy Deﬁnitions 1 for UE are shown in Table 3, where for purposes
of more direct comparison Case I CA statistics are shown only for wo = we. Case I CA statistics for other relative values of wo
and we are shown in Table 4. Box plots of the distribution of measured recurrence times for each CA variant are shown in Fig. 5
and Fig. 6. All UE cases presented here are also INN, and thus exhibit OEE. We therefore refer to UE and OEE interchangeably
(without explicitly referencing OEE as cases exhibiting UE and INN separately). Examples of Case I CA exhibiting OEE are
shown in Fig. 4, demonstrating the innovative patterns that can emerge due to time dependent rules.

To compare the capacity for OEE across the different CA variants tested, it is useful to deﬁne a notion of scalability17. Here
we deﬁne scalable systems as ones where the number of observed OEE cases can increase without the need to either (1) change
the rule-updating mechanism of o or (2) signiﬁcantly change the statistics of sampled cases. By this deﬁnition, the two primary
mechanisms for increasing the number of OEE cases in a scalable manner are by changing wo, or depending on the nature of
the coupling between o and e, changing we (with the constraint that the rule-updating mechanism cannot change).

As expected (by deﬁnition), isolated ECA do not exhibit any OEE cases and the majority of ECA have recurrence times
tr (cid:28) tp. However, all three CA variants with time-dependent rules do exhibit examples of OEE, but differ in the percentage
of sampled cases and their scalability. Case III exhibits the simplest dynamics, where trajectories follow a diffusive random
walk through rule space until the system converges on a random oscillation between the all- (cid:48)0(cid:48) and all-(cid:48)1(cid:48) states (where tr is
approximated by this convergence time). The frequency of state recurrence times tr of the organism decreases exponentially
(see Supplement Fig. S4), such that the o with the longest recurrence times are exponentially rare. Since so few examples were
found for organisms of size wo = 7, we also tested wo = 8 and found no examples of OEE. In general, the exponential decline

10/37

Figure 4. Examples of Case I CA exhibiting OEE. In each panel the environment e is shown on the left, and organism o on
the right. For each o, the Poincar´e recurrence time (tP) for an isolated system is highlighted in blue, and the recurrence time of
the states of o, tr, is highlighted in red.

Table 4. Percentage of sampled cases displaying OEE (satisfying Deﬁnitions 1 and 2) for Case I, with varying environment
size we.

wo
3
4
5
6
7

1
2 wo wo
0
0
0
0
0

0.02
0.38
3.41
0.03
1.06

3
2 wo
6.52
2.28
7.04
2.15
2.95

2wo
10.81
2.94
7.5
2.64
4.39

5
2 wo
28.14
9.65
8.64
5.82
5.34

observed is steeper for increasing wo. Observing more OEE cases therefore requires exponentially increasing the number of
sampled trajectories for increasing wo. The capacity for Case III CA to demonstrate OEE is therefore not scalable with system
size (violating condition 2) in our deﬁnition above). An additional limitation of Case III CA is that their the long-term dynamics
are relatively simple once the system settles into the oscillatory attractor, thus the majority of observations of Case III CA
would not yield interesting dynamics (e.g. if the observation time were much greater than the start time tobs (cid:29) to).

For Case II, we also observed a steep decline in the number of OEE cases observed for increasing wo (Table 3). This is
reﬂected by a steady decrease in the mean of the recurrence times for increasing wo, as shown in Fig. 6. We also tested a large
statistical sample of organisms of size wo ≥ 8 for Case II CA (not shown) and found no examples of OEE cases. This is not
wholly unexpected. For Case II with wo = 8, the environment and organism are the same size (we = wo). Therefore e and o
share the same Poincar´e time tP = 2wo. The subsystem e is a traditional ECA, therefore the majority of e will exhibit recurrence
times (cid:28) tP (see e.g. trend in Fig. 6). Since the rule of o is determined by a 1:1 map from the state of e, the rule recurrence time
of o will also be much less than the Poincar´e time, such that t(cid:48)
r (cid:28) tP. It is the rule evolution that drives novelty in the state
evolution, we therefore also see that the state recurrence time is similarly limited such that tr (cid:28) tP also holds. To get around
this limitation one could increase the size of the environment such that we > wo. However, since the rule for o is a 1:1 map
from the state of e, this would require changing the updating rule scheme for o. That is, the organism o would have to change
how it evolves in time as a function of its environment (violating 1) in our deﬁnition of scalability above. By our deﬁnition of
scalability, this is not a scalable mechanism for generating OEE since o must change the function for its updating rule and
therefore would represent a different o.

We can compare the statistics of sampled OEE cases for Case I where wo = we to those of Case II and Case III, as in Table
3. While Case II and Case III CA see a steep drop-off in the percentage of sampled cases exhibiting OEE with increasing
organism size wo, the Case I CA exhibit a ﬂatter trend. We determined whether this trend holds for varying we by also analyzing
statistics for Case I CA where we = 1
2 wo. The statistics of OEE cases sampled are shown in Table 4 and

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

11/37

box plots of the distribution of recurrence times are shown in Fig. 5. For each ﬁxed environment size explored (we, columns in
Table 4), we observe that the statistics do not decrease dramatically as the size of the organism increases (increasing wo). For
ﬁxed organism size (wo, rows in Table 4), we observe that the number of OEE cases increases with increasing environment size.
These trends are also reﬂected in the means of the distributions shown in Fig. 5. Case I represents a scalable mechanism for
OEE as o can be coupled to larger environments and will produce more OEE cases.

Case I and Case II can be contrasted to gain insights into scalability. The key difference between the two variants is that for
Case II the update rule of o is a 1:1 map with the state of e, whereas for Case I the map is self-referencing and is many:1. Case I
therefore uses a coarse-grained representation of the environment for updating the rule of o and because the dynamics are
self-referential, the same pattern in the environment can lead to different rule transitions in o, depending on the previous state
and rule of o. Thus, although both Case I and Case II exhibit trends of increasing OEE as we is increased relative to wo, the
degree to which the size of the environment can impact the time evolution of the organism is different for the two cases. For a
comparable size environment in Case I and Case II CA, the pattern relevant to the update of o may have a longer recurrence
time than the actual states of e for Case I CA (due to the coarse-graining), whereas for Case II CA this pattern is strictly limited
by the environment’s recurrence time. Additionally, due to the coarse-graining of the environment in Case I CA, the update
rule of o is not dependent on the size of e: the same exact function for updating the rule of o may be applied independent
of the environment size. This is not true for Case II, where the function for updating the rule of o must change in order to
accommodate larger environments.

INN as a proxy for UE
We have presented examples of small dynamical systems to perform rigorous statistical testing of INN and UE to evaluate
candidate mechanisms for generating OEE. An important question is how the results might apply to larger dynamical systems
that could depend on different mechanisms than those testable in simple, discrete systems. While an approximation of INN
is in principle measurable for large or inﬁnite dynamical systems, UE is not measurable or not well-deﬁned. We therefore
aimed to determine if INN can be utilized as a proxy for UE. To do so, we deﬁned a new parameter nr, which quantiﬁes the
number of times that an organism changed its update rule between two successive time steps in its dynamical evolution. We
normalized to determine the relative innovation of an organism I = nr
2w to generate a standardized measure for comparing
across example organisms in our study. Statistically representative results for Case I and Case II organisms are shown in
Fig. 7, where I is plotted against the organism’s state recurrence time (Case III results are not included since the recurrence
time is not well-deﬁned). For both Case I and Case II a clear trend is apparent where innovation is positively (and nearly
linearly) correlated with recurrence time. For a given recurrence time, OEE cases (highlighted in red) are the most innovative.
Comparing the two panels, it is evident that Case I CA exhibit higher innovation and therefore achieve longer recurrence times
than Case II CA. From these results we can conclude that a statistical measure sampling the number of observed rule transitions
could be used as a proxy for UE, which we leave as a subject for future work.

On-going Generation of Complexity in Case I
We also considered the complexity of Case I CA, relative to isolated ECA, as a further test of their scalability and potential to
generate complex and novel dynamics. We characterized the complexity of Case I using two standard complexity measures,
compressibility (C) and Lyapunov exponent (k). The trends demonstrate that in general C decreases with increasing organisms
width wo, but increases with increasing environment size we (left panel, Fig. 8), indicative of increasing complexity with
organism width wo. Similar trends are observed for the Lyapunov exponent, as shown in the right panel of Fig. 8, where it is
evident that increasing wo or we leads to an increasing number of cases with higher Lyapunov exponent k. OEE cases tend to
have the highest k values (see Supplement Fig. S12). As C is normalized relative to ECA (see Supplement 8), we conclude that
Case I CA are generally more complex than ECA evolved according to ﬁxed dynamical rules, and this is especially true for
OEE cases.

We also analyzed the ECA rules implemented in sampled Case I trajectories relative to the Wolfram Rule complexity
classes. We ﬁnd that Case I CA, on average, implement more Class I and II rules than Class III or IV, as shown in the frequency
distribution of Fig. 9 for Case I CA with wo = we (see Supplement Fig. 5 and 6). Thus, we can conclude that the complexity
generated by Case I CA is intrinsic to the state-dependent mechanism, and is not attributable to Class III and Class IV ECA
rules dominating the rule evolution of o.

Discussion

We have provided formal deﬁnitions of unbounded evolution (UE) and innovation (INN) that can be evaluated in any ﬁnite
dynamical system, provided it can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e. Systems satisfying both UE and
INN we expect to minimally represent mechanisms capable OEE. Testing the criteria for UE and INN against three different

12/37

Figure 5. Distribution of recurrence times tr for the state trajectory of o for Case I CA. From top to bottom are distributions
for we = 1wo, wo, 3wo, 2wo and 5wo, respectively. In all panels the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1 (shown on a
log scale). Sampled trajectories displaying UE occur for tr/tP > 1.

13/37

Figure 6. Distribution of recurrence times tr for the state trajectory of o for ECA (top left), Case II (top right), and Case III
CA (bottom). In all panels the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale). Sampled trajectories
displaying UE occur for tr/tP > 1.

14/37

Figure 7. Relative innovation as a function of recurrence times for Case I (left) and Case II (right) CA. Highlighted in red are
cases exhibiting OEE.

CA models with time-dependent rules reveals what we believe to be quite general mechanisms applicable to a broad class of
OEE systems.

Mechanisms for OEE
Our analysis indicates that there are potentially many time-dependent mechanisms that can produce OEE in a subsystem
o embedded within a larger dynamical system, but that some may be more interesting than others. An externally driven
time-dependence for the rules of o (Case II), while producing the highest statistics of OEE cases sampled for small o, does not
provide a scalable mechanism for producing OEE with increasing system size, unless the structure of o itself is fundamentally
altered (such that the rule space changes). Stochastically driven rule evolution displays rich transient dynamics, but ultimately
subsystems converge on dynamics with low complexity (Case III). An alternative is to introduce stochasticity to the states,
rather than the rules, which would avert this issue. This has the drawback that the mechanism for OEE is then not as clearly
mappable to biological processes (or other mechanisms internal to the system), where the genotype (rules) evolve due to random
mutations that then dictate the phenotype (states).

We regard Case I as the most interesting mechanism explored herein for generating conditions favoring OEE: it is scalable
and the dynamics generated are novel. We note that the state-dependent mechanism represents a departure from more traditional
approaches to modeling dynamical systems, e.g. as occurs in the physical sciences, where the dynamical rule is usually
assumed to be ﬁxed. In particular, it represents an explicit form of top-down causation, often regarded as a key mechanism
in emergence19, 28 that could also play an important role in driving major evolutionary transitions29. The state-dependent
mechanism is also consistent with an important hallmark of biology – that biological systems appear to implement self-
referential dynamics such that the “laws” in biology are a function of the states19, 21, 22, a feature that also appears to be
characteristic of the evolution of language30, 31.

Applicability to Other Dynamical Systems
We have independently explored openness to an environment, stochasticity and state-dependent dynamics as we expect these
to be general and apply to a wide-range of dynamical systems that might similarly display OEE by satisfying Deﬁnitions 1
and 2. An important feature of these deﬁnitions is that UE and INN must be driven by extrinsic factors (an environment)32,
although the mechanisms driving the dynamics characteristic of OEE should be intrinsic to the subsystem of interest. OEE can
therefore only be a property of a subsystem. We have not explored the case of feedback from o to e that might drive further
open-ended dynamics, as characteristic of the biosphere, for example in niche construction33, but expect even richer dynamics
to be observed in such cases. For large or inﬁnite dynamical systems INN is an effective proxy for UE, and we expect highly
innovative systems to be the most likely candidates for open-ended evolution.

15/37

Figure 8. Heat maps of compression C (left) and Lyapunov exponent values k (right) for all state trajectories of sampled o for
Case I CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, with distributions shown for we = 1
2 wo (from top
to bottom in each panel, respectively) for each wo. Distributions are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for each
wo and we (see statistics in Table S3).

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

Figure 9. Rank ordered frequency distributions of rules implemented in the attractor dynamics of o for all sampled Case I CA
(top) and OEE cases only (bottom). Highlighted are Wolfram Class III (light blue) and IV rules (dark blue).

16/37

Conclusions

Our results demonstrate that OEE, as formalized herein, is a general property of dynamical systems with time-dependent
rules. This represents a radical departure from more traditional approaches to dynamics where the “laws” remain ﬁxed. Our
results suggest that uncovering the principles governing open-ended evolution and innovation in biological and technological
systems may require removing the segregation of states and ﬁxed dynamic laws characteristic of the physical sciences for
the last 300 years. In particular, state-dependent dynamics have been shown to out-perform other candidate mechanisms in
terms of scalability, suggestive of paths forward for understanding OEE. Our analysis connects all four hallmarks of OEE and
provides a mechanism for producing OEE that is consistent with the self-referential nature of living systems. By casting the
formalism of OEE within the broader context of dynamical systems theory, the proof-of-principle approach presented opens up
the possibility of ﬁnding unifying principles of OEE that encompass both biological and artiﬁcial systems.

Supplementary Materials

Description of Implementations of Time-Dependent Cellular Automata Variants
We consider three new variants of cellular automata (CA) to identify mechanism(s) that can produce conditions necessary for
open-ended evolution (OEE) in bounded regions, subject to the formal criteria for OEE laid out in Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 in the
main text. We consider deﬁnitions of unbounded evolution (UE) and innovation (INN) that are applicable to any instance of
a dynamical system u that can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e. Each CA variant implements time-
dependent rules for o, with different functional forms f for this time-dependence. Here we describe in detail the implementation
of each variant considered.

Case I: Deterministic State-Dependent Rules in Subsystem o
The ﬁrst variant, Case I, implements state-dependent update rules. Case I CA are composed of two spatially separate, ﬁxed-
width, 1-dimensional CA: an “organism” o and an environment e. Both o and e are implemented with periodic boundary
conditions, and utilize the alphabet {0, 1}. The environment e is an execution of an ECA, and is evolved according to a ﬁxed
rule drawn from the set of 256 possible ECA rules, with periodic boundary conditions.

The subsystem o updates its rule according to a function f such that ro(t + 1) = f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)), where so and ro are
the state and rule of the organism and se is the state of the environment. It is evolved with periodic boundary conditions. The
expressed ECA rule of o at time t, ro(t), is represented by the eight-bit binary representation of its rule table24, e.g. an o
implementing Rule 30 at time t will have ro(t) = [0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0] (see main text Fig. 3). We refer to individual bits within
the rule by the index i such that ro(t)[1] = 0, ro(t)[2] = 0, ro(t)[3] = 0, ro(t)[4] = 1 etc. for an o implementing Rule 30 at time
t. The binary representation of ECA rules are structured such that each successive bit i iterated in this manner represents the
output of application of the rule to the ordered set of triplet states S3 = [111, 110, 101, 100, 011, 010, 001, 000].

The function f for our example implementation of state-dependent CA is constructed such that at each time-step t it
compares the normalized frequency of each triplet i in S3 in the state of o and e, so(t) and se(t), respectively, and ﬂips the
corresponding bit i in ro(t) if i is expressed in so and the normalized frequency of the triplet in so(t) meets or exceeds the
normalized frequency in se(t) (where the frequency is normalized relative to the number of possible triplets in the state). That
is, at each time-step t, a bit i in ro(t) will ﬂip 0 ↔ 1 if ni(so(t)) ≥ ni(se(t)), where ni counts the relative frequency of triplet i.
Formally,

(cid:40)

ro(t + 1)[i] =

ro(t)[i]
ro(t)[i]

if ni(so(t)) ≥ ni(se(t))
if ni(so(t)) < ni(se(t))

where the overbar represents logical negation.

An example implementation of this update function is shown in Fig. 4 in the main text, where an “organism” o with wo = 4
is coupled to an environment e with we = 6, and ro(t) = [0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0]. In the example, only for i = 3, corresponding to
the triplet {1, 0, 1}, is n3(so(t)) ≥ n3(se(t)). Therefore, ro(t + 1)[3] = ro(t)[3] = ¯0 = 1, as shown schematically in Fig. 5 in the
main text. In this example, the interaction of o and e under f changes ro from Rule 30 at time-step t to Rule 62 at t + 1.

Case II: Deterministic Time-Dependent Rules in Subsystem o
The second variant, Case II, is similarly composed of two spatially separate, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional CA: an “organism”
o and an environment e. As with Case I, both o and e are implemented with periodic boundary conditions, and utilize the
alphabet {0, 1}. The environment e is an execution of an ECA, and is evolved according to a ﬁxed rule drawn from the set of
256 possible ECA rules, just as in Case I.

(1)

17/37

The key difference between Case I and Case II CA is that for Case II, the subsystem o updates its rule according to a
function f such that ro(t + 1) = f (se(t)). That is, for Case II the update rule of o depends only on the state of the external
environment se and is independent of the current state or rule of o (that is, o is not self-referential). Formally,

ro(t + 1)[i] = se(t)[i]

Here ro(t) is determined uniquely by se(t), such that the binary representation of each possible state of the environment uniquely
maps to one ECA rule according to Wolfram’s binary classiﬁcation scheme24. For this implementation the environment must be
of width we = 8 to mediate a bijective map between {se} and {ro}. Case II CA emulate systems where the rules for dynamical
evolution are modulated exclusively by the time evolution of an external system.

Case III: Stochastic Time-Dependent Rules in Subsystem o
The ﬁnal variant, Case III, is composed of a single, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional CA: the “organism” o. Like Case II, the rule
evolution of Case III is driven externally and does not depend on so. However, here the external environment e is stochastic noise
and not an ECA. In Case III CA, the subsystem o updates its rule according to a function f such that ro(t + 1) = f (ro(t), ξ ),
where ξ introduces random ﬂuctuations in the implemented rule of o by stochastically ﬂipping bits in ro. Formally,

ro(t + 1)[i] =

(cid:40)

ro(t)[i]
ro(t)[i]

if ξ < µ
if ξ ≥ µ

where µ is a ﬁxed threshold for ﬂipping between [0, 1), and ξ is a random number drawn from the interval [0, 1). This
implements a diffusive-random walk through ECA rule space. Since the rule of o at time t + 1, ro(t + 1), depends on the rule at
time t, ro(t), the dynamics of Case III CA are path-dependent in a similar manner to Case I (both rely on ﬂipping bits in ro(t),
where Case I do so deterministically as a function of so and se, and Case III do so stochastically).

Table 5. The size of the randomly sampled subspace for Case I CA for each wo and we explored.

#u

% Explored CA Variant wo

#u

% Explored

CA Variant wo
Case I:
we = 1

3

2 wo

Case I:
we = wo

Case I:
we = 3

2 wo

2.1×106

4.19×106
1.68×107
3.36×107
1.34×108

4.19×106

1.68×107
6.71×107
2.68×108
1.07×109

1.25

1.25
0.62
0.62
0.31

0.63

0.31
0.16
7.81×10−2
3.91×10−2

8.34×106

0.28

6.71×107
2.68×108
2.15×109
8.59×109

6.92×10−2
3.75×10−2
2.52×10−3
1.24×10−3

4
5
6
7

3

4
5
6
7

3

4
5
6
7

Case I:
we = 2wo

Case I:
we = 5

2 wo

3

4
5
6
7

3

4
5
6
7

3.36×107

6.92×10−2

2.68×108
2.15×109
1.72×1010
1.37×1011

1.73×10−2
4.69×10−3
3.16×10−4
7.75×10−5

6.71×107

3.91×10−2

1.074×109
8.59×108
1.37×1011
1.1×1012

4.88×10−2
1.22×10−3
1.53×10−4
3.81×10−5

Experimental Methods
The number of possible executions grows exponentially large with wo, limiting the computational tractability of statistically
rigorous sampling of the dynamics of each CA variant and of generating the set of counterfactual isolated ECA trajectories.
We therefore explored small CA with wo = 3, 4, . . . 7 and sampled a representative subset of all possible trajectories for each
wo (see Section for examples of larger CA). We then generated statistics on the number of sampled trajectories satisfying
Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 for unbounded evolution and innovation, respectively.

(2)

(3)

18/37

Case I Experiments
For Case I, we must be speciﬁed in addition to wo. We consider systems with we = 1
2 wo . For
comparison to Case II and Case III CA, we = wo statistics are used. For each wo and we, the initial state of o, so(0), the initial
state of e, se(0), the initial rule of o, ro(0) and the rule of e, re, are drawn at random. For r0(0) and re, we only consider the
88 non-equivalent ECA rules, which dramatically reduces the number of possible cases, but still covers the full spectrum of
complexity in initial conﬁgurations. We then permit ro to evolve into any of the 256 possible ECA rules. We also ensure that no
two cases sampled are initialized with the same tuple {so(0), se(0), ro(0), re}.

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

The space of all possible Case I CA executions is too large to explore the full space computationally. Since each e and o are

each initiated with a state and a rule, the number of possible executions is:

NU = N2

R × NSe × NSo = 882 × 28we × 28wo

(4)

where NR is the number of sampled initial rules for o and e, NSe is the number of sampled initial states for e, and NSo is the
number of sampled initial states for o. For wo = we = 3 and wo = we = 4, exploring the full space of all possible initial
conditions is computationally tractable, and veriﬁes that the statistics reported herein for executions of o that display UE and
INN are characteristic of the full computational space for the smaller sample sizes implemented in this study. The number of
randomly sampled cases for Case I CA included herein is given in Table 5.

Case II Experiments
For Case II, we = 8 for all simulations, since this permits a bijective map from {se} to the rule space of ECA and thus the set of
rules {ro}. As with Case I CA, executions are initialized with a randomized tuple {so(0), se(0), ro(0), re}, ensuring that no two
experiments are initialized with the same tuple. We restrict attention only to we = 8 for Case II experiments in this study to
directly compare to our Case I and Case III CA. The number of randomly sampled cases for Case II CA is given in Table 6.

Table 6. The size of the randomly sampled subspace for Case II CA for each wo explored.

Case III Experiments
For Case III, a threshold µ for stochastic ﬂipping of the bits in the rule table of o must be set. Results for Case III are given
for µ = 0.5 in the main paper, such that each outcome bit in the rule table at every time step ro(t) has a 50% probability of
ﬂipping. Results for other values are reported in Section . Since we evolve only the subsystem o for Case III CA, executions are
initialized with a random tuple {so(0), ro(0)}. We do not restrict sampled executions to unique tuples, since a different random
seed is set for each execution. The number of randomly sampled cases for Case III CA is given in Table 7.

Table 7. The size of the randomly sampled subspace for Case III CA for each wo explored.

CA Variant wo
Case II:
we = 8

3

#u

% Explored

1.34×108

2.31×10−2

2.68×108
5.37×108
1.07×109
2.15×109

2.1×10−2
2.1×10−2
2.1×10−2
1.98×10−2

CA Variant wo
Case III:
Random

3

#u

% Explored

5.24×105

10

1.05×106
2.1×106
4.19×106
8.39×106

5
5
5
5

4
5
6
7

4
5
6
7

Calculating Recurrence Time, Compressibility and Lyapunov Exponent
Recurrence times for the state- and rule-trajectory of o were calculated to identify cases exhibiting UE and thus OEE. The
complexity of the state trajectory {so(0), so(1), . . . so(tr)} was measured by means of its compressibility (C), and calculation of
the Lyapunov exponent (k).

19/37

r and tr for o, for both the rule evolution {ro(t1), ro(t2), ro(t3) . . . ro(t(cid:48)

r when the sequence of states or rules of o, respectively, repeated. In general, tr and t(cid:48)

Recurrence Time
For Cases I and II,we measured the recurrence times t(cid:48)
r)}
and the state evolution {so(t1), so(t2), so(t3) . . . so(tr)}, respectively. Recurrence times were calculated by determining the time
tr or t(cid:48)
r for o are not the same as for the full
system u (or as each other, such that often tr (cid:54)= t(cid:48)
r, see Fig. 1 in the main text). We therefore ﬁrst determined when u repeated
the tuple {so, se, ro} such that {so(t(cid:48)), se(t(cid:48)), ro(t(cid:48))} = {so(t), se(t), ro(t)}, where t < t(cid:48). We then determined the tr such that
{so(tr), so(tr + 1), . . . so(t(cid:48))} = {so(ti), so(ti + 1), . . . so(tr)} for ti < tr (and likewise for t(cid:48)
r with the replacement ro for so). The
time step ti is identiﬁed as initiation of the attractor dynamics for o. In many cases, we ﬁnd attractors that are unbounded and
innovative by Deﬁnitions 1 and 2, in addition to full trajectories up to recurrence. An example illustrating the expected Poincar´e
time for o, tP, its recurrence time for the state trajectory tr and the attractor size for the full system u, ta (up to the recurrence
time t(cid:48) for the full system) is shown in Fig. 10.

Figure 10. Relevant timescales for describing the dynamics of o embedded in u. Shown are the Poincar´e recurrence time tP
(blue) for an isolated ECA of the same width wo as o, the state-trajectory recurrence time tr of o (red), and attractor size of the
full system u, ta (green).

Since Case III CA are stochastically evolved, their dynamics do not repeat with a unique recurrence time tr for o. However,
all executions sampled eventually terminated in an oscillation between the two homogeneous states (all-‘0’s or all-‘1’s). These
states are attractors for every ﬁxed rule ECA evolved under periodic boundary conditions, so once a Case III CA evolves to
either homogeneous state, no heterogeneity will ever be produced (the dynamics behave somewhat like dissipation of the
heterogeneity in the initial state). We therefore consider it more meaningful to calculate the number of time steps before
convergence to this oscillatory attractor in place of the recurrence time tr, which we denote by tr for consistency of notation with
other cases explored. We therefore capture the timescale of relevance for all interesting (and potentially complex) dynamics,
which occur in the transient before converging to this attractor.

Compressibility
The Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity of string s is deﬁned as the size of the shortest computer program p running on a universal
Turing machine U that produces the string s (here s is the sequence of states of o):

Although it cannot be computed exactly, it is lower semi-computable and can be approximated by using a general lossless
compression algorithm L?. This upper-bound approximation of the Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity is normalized according to
a normalized compression measure C:

KU (s) = min{|p|,U(p) = s} .

C(s) =

L(s)
max(Ci(s), length(s))

.

Throughout this paper Ci is output of the Compress algorithm based on the LZW algorithm?. It can be replaced by the output
of any other compression algorithm. The measure is therefore a family of possible indexes approximating K. We use C as

(5)

(6)

20/37

measure over the state-trajectory of the organism o for each execution u, as an approximation of the characteristic complexity
of o in the limit of large times t → ∞.

Large values of C indicate low Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity, meaning the output can be produced by a simple (short)
program p. The normalization constant max(C(s), length(s)) was calculated by measuring the number of bits resulting from
a generalized compression algorithm for the Poincar´e recurrence time of the entire system u, not an isolated organism. This
allows normalizing the observed C to its maximum possible value for an organism coupled to an environment. This closely
approximates an upper limit in C for the longest possible non-repeating trajectory for any given o.

In order to ensure the normalization constant for an organism of width wo is a close approximation to the maximal value,
Ci(s) was calculated for 107 randomly generated ECA of width wo, evolved with a ﬁxed rule for 22w time steps, where w is
the width of u, such that w = wo + we. The maximum of this set was used as the normalization constant max(Ci(s), length(s)).
Thus, all C values are normalized relative to the maximal complexity of a CA evolved according to a ﬁxed dynamical rule.

Lyapunov Exponent
The Lyapunov exponent k captures the speed at which a perturbation moves through a system27, thereby quantifying sensitivity
to initial conditions. In CA, k can be, in general, measured by perturbing a single bit in the initial condition, and counting how
many bits differ compared to the unperturbed time evolution in each time step:

y(t) = Hio[si(t), so(t)]

(7)

where Hio is the Hamming distance between the state of the perturbed system i and the original organism o, which is evaluated
at each time step t. The resulting time series of y(t) values can be approximated as an exponential function, y(t) = ekt , where k
is estimated numerically. High values of k indicate sensitivity to perturbations, which is typically associated with complex
dynamical systems, such as those that occur in deterministic chaos.

Statistics of Sampled Trajectories Displaying Innovation (INN)
Tables 8 and 9 show the resulting statistics for sampled o that were found to be innovative (INN) according to Deﬁnition 2.
Table 8 includes all three CA variants as well as ECA counterfactual trajectories used as a control. Table 9 shows results for
state-dependent Case I CA as a function of varying environment size we. Innovative o were identiﬁed as having a state-trajectory
that cannot be reproduced by any closed, ﬁxed rule ECA of equivalent width w = wo.

Table 8. Percentage of sampled cases displaying INN for each CA variant.

wo ECA Case I (wo = we) Case II Case III
3
4
5
6
7

99.98
99.97
99.97
99.97
99.97

54.62
74.66
92.56
88.14
97.14

99.82
99.87
99.92
99.94
99.97

0
0
0
0
0

Table 9. Percentage of sampled cases displaying INN for Case I, with varying environment size we.

wo we = 1
30.72
3
33.32
4
32.42
5
35.64
6
52.92
7

2 wo we = wo we = 3
70.10
86.57
96.22
97.03
97.43

54.62
74.66
92.56
88.14
97.14

2 wo we = 2wo we = 5
93.29
97.47
98.72
99.29
99.63

86.04
95.52
98.32
98.91
99.51

2 wo

Recurrence time frequency distributions
The frequency distribution of tr observed for sampled state trajectories of o in Case I, Case II and Case III CA are shown
in Figures 11,12 and 13, respectively. Comparing the three cases reveals that for equivalently sized ensembles of sampled
trajectories for Case I, Case II, and Case III CA, the Case I CA generate OEE cases with higher statistical certainty than either
the Case II or Case III CA for most parameters explored. This is especially true for cases where we > wo in Case I simulations.
From Figure 11 it is evident that larger environments yield more UE cases with tr > tP and in general result in longer observed
recurrence times.

21/37

Case II CA yield fewer OEE cases as wo increases, as evident in Figure 12. As discussed in the main text, Case II is not

scalable as it would require changing the structure of the rules of the organism o.

Case III CA generate fewer OEE cases than Case I as the width of o increases, with no cases observed in our statistical
sample for wo > 7 for µ = 0.5 (Figure 11 bottom panel, leftmost column). The frequency distribution of recurrence times for
Case III CA with µ = 0.01, µ = 0.1 and µ = 0.5 are shown in Figure 11. For smaller values of µ OEE cases are observed for
larger wo. In the context of biological evolution, the mechanism for increasing the number of OEE cases under Case III would
therefore be for systems to evolve toward slower mutation rates over time. However, because the distributions are exponentially
distributed, the number of OEE cases is always exponentially suppressed, representing only a small tail of the distribution. A
ﬁxed width wo execution could always be found in a large enough statistical sample that such that the observed tr would be
greater than the maximum recurrence time observed in a Case I CA with an equivalent organism width wo. However, in general
due to the exponential suppression of cases with larger tr for Case III variants (Figure 13), the ensemble size of sampled cases
will necessarily be much larger for Case III CA than for Case I CA. That is, for a sufﬁciently large ensemble size one could
chose a value of µ and generate a trajectory in a width wo organism with a given recurrence time tr, but would always be able
to ﬁnd an example trajectory of the same tr for a smaller sized ensemble of Case I CA for some environment width we. Due
to the exponential suppression, OEE cases are much rarer for Case III than Case I CA. Additionally, once Case III reach the
terminal attractor their dynamics are not complexity, whereas Case I CA will repeat an attractor state that is in general complex
and is often times open-ended (such that the attractor itself satisﬁes Deﬁnitions 1 and 2). We therefore regard Case III to not be
scalable.

22/37

ECA Rule Complexity of Case I CA
To determine if the complexity observed in Case I CA is intrinsic to the state-dependent mechanism, or is an artifact of a
selection-effect favoring complex rules, we determined the frequency of rules implemented in Case I CA utilizing the Wolfram
classiﬁcation scheme for Elementary Cellular Automata24. There are four Wolfram Classes: Class I and II are regarded as the
least complex, often generating simple repeating patterns. Class III rules are more complex displaying random patterns, and
Class IV are regarded as the most complex, displaying rich dynamical structure (for example, ECA Rule 110, which is known
to be Turing Universal? is a Class IV ECA). We analyze the complexity of ECA rules implemented in the rule trajectories
of Case I CA by considering the frequency of implementation of rules from each class to determine if the complexity of the
observed dynamics is an artifact of the ECA rules or intrinsic to f .

The resulting rank ordered frequency distribution of rules is shown in Figure 14 for all sampled Case I CA of a given
organism width wo, and separately for the OEE cases in Figure 15. Since this data includes statistics for the entire sample of
o of a given width wo included in our study, we call these distributions “metagenomes” to indicate that they represent bulk
statistics over many instances of “organisms” o. The resulting distributions indicate that Case I CA primarily implement Class
I and II rules, indicative that the complexity observed is intrinsic to the state-dependent mechanism and not an artifact of
selective use of ‘complex’ Class III and IV ECA rules. This is true for statistics sampled over all Case I CA (Figure 14), as well
as isolating only OEE cases (Figure 15).

23/37

Distributions of Attractor Sizes
Figures 16 - 17 show box-whisker plots of the attractor sizes for the subsystem o for each ECA and for Case I and Case II
CA (Case III CA terminate in a random, oscillatory attractor and the statistics are therefore not included here, see Section
for discussion). In each ﬁgure, the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1, where ta is the attractor size and tP is the
expected Poincar´e time of an equivalent isolated system (an ECA). Sampled attractors exhibiting unbounded evolution (UE)
have ta/tP > 1 and therefore fall above the black solid line - these are examples of OEE attractors.

24/37

Compressibility and Lyapunov Exponent Values for Case I and II CA
Compressibility and Lyapunov exponent for OEE trajectories sampled from Case I CA
Calculated values for compressibility (C) and Lyapunov exponent (k), as deﬁned in Section , are shown in Figure 19 for the
state trajectory of o for all sampled OEE executions for Case I CA. Comparison of the left panel of Figure 19 with the left
panel of Figure 2 in the main text reveals that the observed C for all OEE cases tends to be lower than that calculated over all
sampled o for Case I: that is, the OEE cases exhibit lower C, consistent with intuition that systems with longer recurrence times
should be ’more complex’. As wo increases, more OEE cases tend to have lower C values, such that larger “organisms” are
more complex.

Likewise, comparing the right panel of Figure 19 with the right panel of Figure 2 in the main text indicates that OEE cases
also tend to have much higher k values than that calculated over all sampled o for Case I, indicative of greater sensitivity to
perturbations in OEE systems. Large values of wo lead to larger k, on average, such that larger OEE “organisms” are more
sensitive to perturbations and therefore display richer, more complex dynamics.

25/37

Comparison of compressibility and Lyapunov exponent for Case I and Case II CA
Calculated values for compressibility (C) and Lyapunov exponent (k), as deﬁned in Section , are compared for Case I and Case
II CA in Figures 20 and 21. Case III is not considered as the long-term dynamics display low complexity for the oscillatory
attractor of the homogenous all-’0’ and all-’1’ states. For both Case I and Case II CA variants, increasing wo yields more OEE
cases with lower C values, such that larger “organisms” are more complex (Figure 20).

Case II CA yield lower C values than Case I for the data shown as a result of the difference in the normalization implemented
in Eq. 6, which for Case II CA is lower since the the width of u is w = wo + 8 for all wo explored, whereas for Case I CA the
width of u is w = 2 ∗ wo (for we = wo as shown). Additionally, as noted Case I is scalable as we can be increased to generate
higher complexity (lower C) cases. The Lyapunov exponent for Case II is in general higher than for Case I, indicating greater
sensitivity to perturbations in the initial condition for Case II CA than Case I. For both CA variants, k increases with increasing
organism size k, such that larger organisms are more complex.

26/37

Larger Systems
Figure 22 shows example executions of Case I state-dependent CA for large organisms of width wo = 101, which visually
demonstrate that the novelty of the dynamics reported herein scale to large system sizes.

References

1. Bedau, M. A., Snyder, E. & Packard, N. H. A classiﬁcation of long-term evolutionary dynamics. In Artiﬁcial life VI,

228–237 (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1998).

2. Bettencourt, L. M., Lobo, J., Helbing, D., K¨uhnert, C. & West, G. B. Growth, innovation, scaling, and the pace of life in

cities. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 104, 7301–7306 (2007).

3. Seyfarth, R. M., Cheney, D. L. & Bergman, T. J. Primate social cognition and the origins of language. Trends in cognitive

sciences 9, 264–266 (2005).

4. Buchanan, A., Packard, N. H. & Bedau, M. A. Measuring the evolution of the drivers of technological innovation in the

patent record. Artiﬁcial life 17, 109–122 (2011).

5. Skusa, A. & Bedau, M. A. Towards a comparison of evolutionary creativity in biological and cultural evolution. Artiﬁcial

6. Oka, M., Hashimoto, Y. & Ikegami, T. Open-ended evolution in a web system. Late Breaking Papers at the European

7. Bedau, M. A. et al. Open problems in artiﬁcial life. Artiﬁcial life 6, 363–376 (2000).

8. Banzhaf, W. et al. Deﬁning and simulating open-ended novelty: requirements, guidelines, and challenges. Theory in

9. Taylor, T. J. From artiﬁcial evolution to artiﬁcial life. Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh. College of Science and

Life 8, 233–242 (2003).

Conference on Artiﬁcial Life 17 (2015).

Biosciences 1–31 (2016).

Engineering. School of Informatics. (1999).

67–85 (2008).

10. Ruiz-Mirazo, K., Umerez, J. & Moreno, A. Enabling conditions for open-ended evolution. Biology & Philosophy 23,

11. Bedau, M. Can biological teleology be naturalized? The Journal of Philosophy 647–655 (1991).

12. Bedau, M. A. & Packard, N. H. Measurement of evolutionary activity, teleology, and life. In Langton, I. C., Taylor, C.,
Farmer, D. & Rasmussen, S. (eds.) Artiﬁcial Life II, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity (M. A. Bedau
and N. H. Packard, 1992).

13. Fernando, C., Kampis, G. & Szathm´ary, E. Evolvability of natural and artiﬁcial systems. Procedia Computer Science 7,

14. Ruiz-Mirazo, K. & Moreno, A. Autonomy in evolution: from minimal to complex life. Synthese 185, 21–52 (2012).

15. Guttenberg, N. & Goldenfeld, N. Cascade of complexity in evolving predator-prey dynamics. Physical review letters 100,

73–76 (2011).

058102 (2008).

16. Ruiz-Mirazo, K., Peret´o, J. & Moreno, A. A universal deﬁnition of life: autonomy and open-ended evolution. Origins of

Life and Evolution of the Biosphere 34, 323–346 (2004).

17. Taylor, T. et al. Open-ended evolution: Perspectives from the oee1 workshop in york. Artiﬁcial Life (2016).

18. Zenil, H. Compression-based investigation of the dynamical properties of cellular automata and other systems. Complex

Systems 19, 1–28 (2010).

19. Walker, S. I. & Davies, P. C. The algorithmic origins of life. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 10, 20120869 (2013).

20. Davies, P. C. & Walker, S. I. The hidden simplicity of biology. Reports on Progress in Physics 79, 102601 (2016).

21. Goldenfeld, N. & Woese, C. Life is physics: Evolution as a collective phenomenon far from equilibrium. Annu. Rev.

Condens. Matter Phys. 2, 375–399 (2011).

22. Douglas, R. H. G¨odel, escher, bach: An eternal golden braid (Basic Books, New York, 1979).

23. Noble, D. A theory of biological relativity: no privileged level of causation. Interface Focus 2, 55–64 (2012).

24. Wolfram, S. A New Kind of Science, vol. 5 (Wolfram Media Champaign, 2002).

25. Smith, E. Thermodynamics of natural selection i: Energy ﬂow and the limits on organization. Journal of theoretical

biology 252, 185–197 (2008).

27/37

26. Pavlic, T. P., Adams, A. M., Davies, P. C. & Walker, S. I. Self-referencing cellular automata: A model of the evolution
of information control in biological systems. Proc. of the Fourteenth International Conference on the Synthesis and
Simulation of Living Systems (ALIFE 14) (2014).

27. Tisseur, P. Cellular automata and lyapunov exponents. Nonlinearity 13, 1547 (2000).

28. Ellis, G. F. Top-down causation and emergence: some comments on mechanisms. Interface Focus rsfs20110062 (2011).

29. Walker, S. I., Cisneros, L. & Davies, P. C. Evolutionary transitions and top-down causation. Proceedings of Artiﬁcial Life

30. Levary, D., Eckmann, J.-P., Moses, E. & Tlusty, T. Loops and self-reference in the construction of dictionaries. Physical

31. Kataoka, N. & Kaneko, K. Functional dynamics. i: Articulation process. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 138, 225–250

XIII 283–290 (2012).

Review X 2, 031018 (2012).

(2000).

32. Taylor, T. Redrawing the boundary between organism and environment. Proceedings of Artiﬁcial Life IX 268–273 (2004).

33. Laubichler, M. D. & Renn, J. Extended evolution: A conceptual framework for integrating regulatory networks and niche
construction. Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular and Developmental Evolution 324, 565–577 (2015).

Acknowledgements

This project was made possible through support of a grant from the Templeton World Charity Foundation. The opinions
expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of Templeton World Charity
Foundation. We thank S. Wolfram, T. Rowland, T. Beynon, A. Rueda-Toicen, and C. Marletto, and the Emergence group at
ASU for helpful discussions related to this work.

Author contributions

A.A., H.Z. and S.I.W. designed the research; A.A. and S.I.W. performed research; A.A., H.Z., P.D. and S.I.W. analyzed
data; A.A., H.Z., P.D. and S.I.W. wrote the paper. All data and related code has been made publically available at https:
//github.com/alyssa-adams/OEE_Project.

Competing ﬁnancial interests

The author(s) declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.

28/37

Figure 11. Frequency distributions of recurrence times tr for Case I CA with we = wo (leftmost column), we = 3
middle), we = 2wo (right middle) and we = 5
respectively. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of an isolated ECA of width wo is highlighted by the black vertical line in each
panel.

2 wo (rightmost column). For rows from top to bottom, wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7

2 wo (left

29/37

Figure 12. Frequency distributions of recurrence times tr for Case II CA. From top to bottom, wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7
respectively. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of an isolated ECA of width wo is highlighted by the black vertical line in each
panel.

30/37

Figure 13. Frequency distributions of tr for Case III CA with µ = 0.01 (left), µ = 0.1 (middle) and µ = 0.5 (right). From top
to bottom, wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 respectively. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of an isolated ECA of width wo is highlighted by
the black vertical line in each panel.

31/37

Figure 14. Rank ordered frequency distributions of rules (“metagenomes”) implemented by o in its attractor. From top to
bottom we = 1
2 wo, respectively. Highlighted in blue are the frequencies of Class I and II rules (left),
Class III rules (middle) and Class IV rules (right).

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

32/37

Figure 15. Rank ordered frequency distributions of rules (“metagenomes”) implemented by o in its attractor for OEE cases
only. From top to bottom we = 1
2 wo, respectively. Highlighted in blue are the frequencies of Class I and
II rules (left), Class III rules (middle) and Class IV rules (right).

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

Figure 16. Distribution of attractor sizes ta for the state trajectory of for all 88 non-equivalent ECA rules, evolved from all
possible initial conditions of width wo. Attractor sizes are normalized to the Poincar´e time tP = 2wo for an isolated ECA, where
the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale).

33/37

Figure 17. Distribution of attractor sizes ta for the state trajectory of o, for Case II CA. Attractor sizes are normalized to the
Poincar´e time tP = 2wo for an isolated ECA. The black horizontal line indicates where ta/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale).
Sample trajectories displaying unbounded evolution (UE) occur for ta/tP > 1.

34/37

Figure 18. Distribution of attractor sizes ta for the state trajectory of o for Case I CA. Shown from top to bottom are
distributions for we = 1
for an isolated ECA. The black horizontal line indicates where ta/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale). Sampled trajectories
displaying UE occur for tr/tP > 1.

2 wo, respectively. Attractor sizes are normalized to the Poincar´e time tP = 2wo

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

35/37

Figure 19. Heat maps of compression C (left) and Lyapunov exponent values k (right) for sampled OEE trajectories for the
states of o for Case I CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, with distributions shown for we = 1
2 wo, 2wo and
5
2 wo (from top to bottom, respectively) for each wo. Distributions are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for
each wo and we (see statistics in Table 5).

2 wo, wo, 3

Figure 20. Heat maps of compression C for all sampled trajectories of the states of o (left), and for OEE trajectories only
(right) shown for Case I and Case II CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. For each wo shown are the distributions of C
for Case I CA for we = wo (top row in each panel) and for Case II CA with we = 8 (bottom row in each panel). Distributions
are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for each wo and we for each CA variant (see statistics in Tables 5 and 6).

36/37

Figure 21. Heat maps of Lyapunov exponent k for all sampled trajectories of the states of o (left), and for OEE trajectories
only (right) shown for Case I and Case II CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. For each wo shown are the distributions
of k for Case I CA for we = wo (top row in each panel) and for Case II CA with we = 8 (bottom row in each panel).
Distributions are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for each wo and we for each CA variant (see statistics in
Tables 5 and 6).

Figure 22. Example executions of the state trajectory of o for Case I CA for large system size wo = 101, with we = wo.

37/37

6
1
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
1
 
 
]
E
N
.
s
c
[
 
 
2
v
0
5
7
1
0
.
7
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Formal Deﬁnitions of Unbounded Evolution and
Innovation Reveal Universal Mechanisms for
Open-Ended Evolution in Dynamical Systems

Alyssa Adams1,2,3, Hector Zenil3,4,5, Paul C.W. Davies1, and Sara Imari Walker1,6,7,8,*

1Beyond Center for Fundamental Concepts in Science, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
2Department of Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
3Algorithmic Nature Group, LABORES, Paris, France
4Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford UK
5Unit of Computational Medicine, SciLifeLab, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm
Sweden
6School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
7ASU-SFI Center for Biosocial Complex Systems, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
8Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Seattle WA USA
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: sara.i.walker@asu.edu

ABSTRACT

Open-ended evolution (OEE) is relevant to a variety of biological, artiﬁcial and technological systems, but has been challenging
to reproduce in silico. Most theoretical efforts focus on key aspects of open-ended evolution as it appears in biology. We recast
the problem as a more general one in dynamical systems theory, providing simple criteria for open-ended evolution based on
two hallmark features: unbounded evolution and innovation. We deﬁne unbounded evolution as patterns that are non-repeating
within the expected Poincar ´e recurrence time of an equivalent isolated system, and innovation as trajectories not observed
in isolated systems. As a case study, we implement novel variants of cellular automata (CA) in which the update rules are
allowed to vary with time in three alternative ways. Each is capable of generating conditions for open-ended evolution, but vary
in their ability to do so. We ﬁnd that state-dependent dynamics, widely regarded as a hallmark of life, statistically out-performs
other candidate mechanisms, and is the only mechanism to produce open-ended evolution in a scalable manner, essential to
the notion of ongoing evolution. This analysis suggests a new framework for unifying mechanisms for generating OEE with
features distinctive to life and its artifacts, with broad applicability to biological and artiﬁcial systems.

Introduction

Many real-world biological and technological systems display rich dynamics, often leading to increasing complexity over time
that is limited only by resource availability. A prominent example is the evolution of biological complexity: the history of life on
Earth has displayed a trend of continual evolutionary adaptation and innovation, giving rise to an apparent open-ended increase
in the complexity of the biosphere over its > 3.5 billion year history1. Other complex systems, from the growth of cities2, to
the evolution of language3, culture4, 5 and the Internet6 appear to exhibit similar trends of innovation and open-ended dynamics.
Producing computational models that generate sustained patterns of innovation over time is therefore an important goal in
modeling complex systems as a necessary step on the path to elucidating the fundamental mechanisms driving open-ended
dynamics in both natural and artiﬁcial systems. If successful, such models hold promise for new insights in diverse ﬁelds
ranging from biological evolution to artiﬁcial life and artiﬁcial intelligence.

Despite the signiﬁcance of realizing open-ended evolution in theoretical models, progress in this direction has been hindered
by lack of a universally accepted deﬁnition for open-ended evolution (OEE). Although relevant to many ﬁelds, OEE is most
often discussed in the context of artiﬁcial life, where the problem is so fundamental that it has been dubbed a “millennium
prize problem”7. Many working deﬁnitions exist, which can be classiﬁed into four hallmark categories as outlined by Banzhaf
et al.8: (1) on-going innovation and generation of novelty9, 10; (2) unbounded evolution1, 11, 12; (3) on-going production of
complexity13–15; (4) a deﬁning feature of life16. Each of these faces its own challenges, as each is cast in terms of equally
ambiguous concepts. For example, the concepts of “innovation” or “novelty”, “complexity” and “life” are all notoriously
difﬁcult to formalize in their own right. It is also not apparent whether “unbounded evolution” is physically possible since
real systems are limited in their dynamics by ﬁnite resources, ﬁnite time, and ﬁnite space. A further challenge is identifying
whether the diverse concepts of OEE are driving at qualitatively different phenomena, or whether they might be uniﬁed within a

common conceptual framework. For example, it has been suggested that increasing complexity might not itself be a hallmark
of OEE, but instead a consequence of it9, 16. Likewise, processes may appear unbounded, even within a ﬁnite space, if they can
continually produce novelty within observable dynamical timescales17.

Given these limitations, it was unclear if OEE is a property unique to life, is inclusive of its artifacts (such as technology),
or if it is an even broader phenomenon that could be a universal property of certain classes of dynamical systems. Many
approaches aimed at addressing the hallmarks of OEE have been inspired by biology17, primarily because biological evolution
is the best known example of a real-world system with the potential to be truly open-ended1. However, as stated, other examples
of potentially open-ended complex systems do exist, such as trends associated with cultural4, 5 and technological2, 6 growth, and
other creative processes. Therefore, herein we set out to develop a more general framework to seek links between the four
aforementioned hallmarks of OEE within dynamical systems, while remaining agnostic about their precise implementation in
biology. Our motivation is to discover universal mechanisms that underlie OEE as it might occur both within and outside of
biological evolution.

In dynamical systems theory there exists a natural bound on the complexity that can be generated by a ﬁnite deterministic
process, which is given by the Poincar´e recurrence time. Roughly, the Poincar´e time is the maximal time after which any
ﬁnite system returns to its initial state and its dynamical trajectory repeats. Clearly, new dynamical patterns cannot occur past
the Poincar´e time if the system is isolated from external perturbations. To cast the concept of unbounded evolution ﬁrmly
within dynamical systems theory, we introduce a formal minimal criteria for unbounded evolution (where we stress that here
we mean the broader concept of dynamical evolution, not just evolution in the biological sense) in ﬁnite dynamical systems:
minimally, an unbounded system is one that does not repeat within the expected Poincar´e time. A key feature is that this
deﬁnition automatically excludes ﬁnite deterministic systems unless they are open to external perturbations in some way. That
is, we contend that unbounded evolution (and in turn OEE which depends on it) is only possible for subsystem interacting
with an external environment. To make better contact with real-world systems, where the Poincar´e time often cannot even in
principle be observed, we introduce a second criteria of innovation. Systems satisfying the minimal deﬁnition of unbounded
evolution must also satisfy a formal notion of innovation, where we deﬁne innovation as dynamical trajectories not observed in
isolated, unperturbed systems. We identify innovation by comparison to counterfactual histories (those of isolated systems).
Like unbounded evolution, innovation is extrinsically deﬁned and requires interaction between at least two subsystems. A given
subsystem can exhibit OEE if only if it is both unbounded and innovative. As we will show, utilizing this criteria for OEE
allows us to evaluate candidate mechanisms for generating OEE in simple toy model dynamical systems, ones that could carry
over to more realistic complex dynamical systems.

The utility of these deﬁnitions is that they provide a simple way to quantify intuition regarding hallmarks (1) and (2) of
OEE for systems of ﬁnite size, which is applicable to any comparable dynamical system. They therefore provide a means
to quantitatively evaluate, and therefore directly compare, different potential mechanisms for generating OEE. We apply
these deﬁnitions to test three new variants of cellular automata (CA) for their capacity to generate OEE. A key feature of the
new variants introduced is their implementation of time-dependent update rules, which represents a radical departure from
more traditional approaches to dynamical systems where the dynamical laws remain ﬁxed. Each variant introduced differs
in its relative openness to an external environment. Of the variants tested, our results indicate that systems that implement
time-dependent rules that are a function of their state are statistically better at satisfying the two criteria for OEE than dynamical
systems with externally driven time-dependence for their rules (that is where the rule evolution is not dependent on the state of
the subsystem of interest). We show that the state-dependent systems provide a mechanism for generating OEE that includes
the capacity for on-going production of novelty by coupling to larger environments. This mechanism is also scales with system
size, meaning the amount of open-endedness that is generated does not drop off as the system size increases. We then explore
the complexity of state-dependent systems in more depth, calculating general complexity measures including compressibility
(based on LZW in18) and Lyapunov exponents. Given that state-dependent dynamics are often cited as a hallmark feature of
life due to the role of self-reference in biological processes19–22, our results provide a new connection between hallmarks (1),
(2) and (4) of OEE. Our results therefore connect several hallmarks of OEE in a new framework that allows identiﬁcation of
mechanisms that might operate in a diverse range of dynamical systems. The framework holds promise for providing insights
into universal mechanisms for generating OEE in dynamical systems, which is applicable to both biological and artiﬁcial
systems.

Theory

Traditionally dynamical systems, like their physical counterparts, are modeled with ﬁxed dynamical laws – a legacy from the
time of Newton. However, this framework may not be the appropriate one for modeling biological complexity, where the
dynamical laws appear to be self-referential and evolve in time as a function of the states19–22. An explicit example is the
feedback between genotype and phenotype within a cell: genes are “read-out” to produce changes to the state of expressed
proteins and RNAs, and these in turn can feedback to turn individual genes on and off23. Given this connection to biology, we

2/37

are motivated in this work to focus explicitly on time-dependent rules, where time-dependence is introduced by driving the rule
evolution through coupling to an external environment. Since open-ended evolution has been challenging to characterize in
traditional models with ﬁxed dynamical rules, implementing time-dependent rules could open new pathways to generating
complexity. In this study we therefore deﬁne open systems as those where the rule dynamically evolves as a function of time,
and we assume this is driven by interaction with an environment. As we show, time-dependent rules allow novel trajectories to
be realized that have not been previously characterized in cellular automata models. To quantify this novelty, we introduce a
rigorous notion of OEE that relies on formalized deﬁnitions of unbounded evolution and innovation. The deﬁnitions presented
rely on utilizing isolated systems evolved according to a ﬁxed rule as a set of counterfactual systems to compare to the novel
dynamics driven by time-dependent rules.

Formalizing Open-Ended Evolution as Unbounded Evolution and Innovation
A hallmark feature of open-ended evolutionary systems is that they appear unbounded in their dynamical evolution1, 11, 12. For
ﬁnite systems, such as those we encounter in the real world, the concept of “unbounded” is not well-deﬁned. In part this is
because all ﬁnite systems will eventually repeat, as captured by the well-known Poincar´e recurrence theorem. As stated in the
theorem, ﬁnite systems are bounded by their Poincar´e recurrence time, which is the maximal time after which a system will
start repeating its prior evolution. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of a ﬁnite, closed deterministic dynamical system therefore
provides a natural bound on when one should expect such a system to stop producing novelty. In other words, tp is an absolute
upper-bound on when such a system will terminate any appearance of open-endedness.

Potentially the Poincar´e recurrence theorem can locally be violated by a subsystem with open boundary conditions or if the
subsystem is stochastic (although in the latter case the system might still be expected to approximately repeat). We therefore
consider a deﬁnition of unbounded evolution applicable to any instance of a dynamical system that can be decomposed into
two interacting subsystems. Nominally, we refer to these two interacting subsystems as the “organism” (o) and “environment”
(e). We note that our framework is sufﬁciently general to apply to systems outside of biology: the concept of “organism” is
meant only to stress that we expect this subsystem to potentially exhibit the rich dynamics intuitively anticipated of OEE when
coupled to an environment (the environment, by contrast, is not expected to produce OEE behavior). The purpose of the second
“environment” subsystem is to explicitly introduce external perturbations to the organism, where e is also part of the larger
system under investigation and modulates the rule of o in a time-dependent manner. We therefore minimally deﬁne unbounded
evolution (UE) as occurring when a sub-partition of a dynamical system does not repeat within its expected Poincar´e recurrence
time, giving the appearance of unbounded dynamics for given ﬁnite resources:

Deﬁnition 1 Unbounded evolution (UE): A system U that can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e,
exhibits unbounded evolution if there exists a recurrence time such that the state-trajectory or the rule-trajectory of o is
non-repeating for tr > tP or t(cid:48)
r the recurrence time of the rules,
and tP is the Poincar´e recurrence time for an equivalent isolated (non-perturbed) system o.

r > tP respectively, where tr is the recurrence time of the states, t(cid:48)

Since we consider o where the states and rules evolve in time, unbounded evolution can apply to the state or rule trajectory
recurrence time and still satisfy Deﬁnition 1. That is, a dynamical system exhibits UE if and only if it can be partitioned such
that the sequence of one of its subsystems’ states or dynamical rules are non-repeating within the expected Poincar´e recurrence
time tP of an equivalent isolated system. In other words, unbounded evolution is only possible in a system that is partitioned
into at least two interacting subsystems. This way, one of the subsystems acts as an external driver for the rule evolution of the
other subsystem, which can then be pushed past its expected maximal recurrence time, tP. We calculate the expected tP as
that of an equivalent isolated system. By equivalent isolated system, we mean the set of all possible trajectories evolved from
any initial state drawn from the same set possible of states as for o, but generated with a ﬁxed rule, which can be any possible
ﬁxed rule. We will describe explicit examples using the Elementary Cellular Automata (ECA) rule space in Section Model
Implementation, where the relevant set of states are those constructed from the binary alphabet {0, 1} and the set of rules for
comparison are the ECA rules. ECA are deﬁned as 1-dimensional CA with nearest-neighbor update rules: for an ECA of width
w (number of cells across), equivalent isolated systems as deﬁned here include all trajectories evolved with any ﬁxed ECA rule
from any initial state of width w, where tP is then tP = 2w and w = wo, where wo is the width of o.

Implementing the above deﬁnition of UE necessarily depends on counterfactual histories of isolated systems (e.g. of ECA
in our examples). These counterfactual systems cannot, by deﬁnition, generate conditions for UE. This suggests as a corollary a
natural deﬁnition for innovation in terms of comparison to the same set of counterfactual histories:

Deﬁnition 2 Innovation (INN): A system U that can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e exhibits
innovation if there exists a recurrence time tr such that the state-trajectory is not contained in the set of all possible state
trajectories for an equivalent isolated (non-perturbed) system.

3/37

Figure 1. State diagrams: A hypothetical example demonstrating the concepts of INN and UE. The possible set of states are
S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and rules R = {α, β }. For each panel, the example state trajectory s is initialized with starting state so = 3.
For panels c and d the rule trajectory r is also shown. Highlighted in bold is the ﬁrst iteration of the attractor for states (all
panels) or rules (panel c and d only). For a discrete deterministic system of six states, the Poincar´e recurrence time is tP = 6.
Panel (a) shows the state transition diagram for hypothetical rule α where a trajectory initialized at s(t0) = 3 visits two states.
Panel (b) shows the state transition diagram for hypothetical rule β where a trajectory initialized at s(t0) = 3 visits only one
state. Since the trajectories in (a) and (b) evolve according to a ﬁxed rule (are isolated) they do not display INN or UE and in
general the recurrence time tr (cid:28) tP. Panel (c) demonstrates INN, where the trajectory shown cannot be fully described by rule
α or rule β alone. The state trajectory s and rule trajectory r both have a recurrence time of tr = 5, which is less than tP so this
example does not exhibit UE. Panel (d) exhibits UE (and is also an example of INN). The trajectory shown cannot be described
by rule α or rule β alone. The recurrence time for the state trajectory is tr = 13, which is greater than tP. The rule trajectory
also satisﬁes the conditions for UE, with a recurrence time in this example that is longer than that of the state trajectory due to
the fact that the state transition 2 → 5 could be driven by rule α or β depending on the coupling to an external system.

4/37

That is, a subsystem o exhibits INN by Deﬁnition 2 if its dynamics are not contained within the set of all possible trajectories
of equivalent isolated systems. We note these deﬁnitions do not necessitate that the complexity of individual states increase with
time, thus one might observe INN without a corresponding rise in complexity with time. Fig. 1 shows a conceptual illustration
of both UE and INN, as presented in Deﬁnitions 1 and 2.

A motivation for including both Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 is that they encompass intuitive notions of “on-going production of
novelty” (INN) and “unbounded evolution” (UE), both of which are considered important hallmarks of OEE8. UE can imply
INN, but INN does not likewise imply UE. It might therefore appear that UE is sufﬁcient to characterize OEE without needing
to appeal to separately deﬁning INN. The utility of including INN in our formalism is that it allows generalization to both
inﬁnite systems where UE is not deﬁned, and to real-world systems where UE is not physically observable (since, for example,
tP could in principle be longer than the age of the universe). For the latter, INN can be an approximation to UE, where higher
values of INN indicate a system more likely to exhibit UE (see Fig. 7). Additionally, the combination of UE and INN can be
used to exclude cases that appear unbounded but are only trivially so. For example, a partition of a system evolved according
to a ﬁxed dynamical rule could in principle locally satisfy UE, but would not satisfy INN since its dynamics could be shown
to be equivalent to those generated from an appropriately constructed isolated system (e.g. a larger ECA in our example).
An example is the time evolution of ECA Rule 3024, which is known to be a ‘complex’ ECA rule that continually generates
novel patterns under open-boundary conditions. In cases such as this, it should be considered that it is the complexity at the
open boundary of the system that is generating continual novelty and not a mechanism internal to the system itself. In other
words, in such examples the complexity is generated by the boundary conditions. Since our biosphere has simple, relatively
homogeneous boundary conditions (geochemical and radiative energy sources) the complexity of the biosphere likely arises
due to internal mechanisms and is not trivially generated by the boundary conditions alone25. Since we aim to understand
the intrinsic mechanisms that might drive OEE in real, ﬁnite dynamical systems, we therefore require both deﬁnitions to be
satisﬁed for a dynamical system to exhibit non-trivial OEE.

Model implementation
We evaluate different mechanisms for generating OEE against Deﬁnitions 1 and 2, utilizing the rule space of Elementary
Cellular Automata (ECA) as a case study. ECA are deﬁned as nearest-neighbor 1-dimensional CA operating on the two-bit
alphabet {0, 1}. There are 256 possible ECA rules, and since the rule numbering is arbitrary, we label them according to
Wolfram’s heuristic designation24. Due to their relative simplicity, ECA represent some of the most widely-studied CA, thus
providing a well-characterized foundation for this study. Traditionally, ECA evolve according to a ﬁxed dynamical rule starting
from a speciﬁed initial state. As such, no isolated ﬁnite ECA can meet both of the criteria laid out in Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 as per
our construction aimed at excluding trivial cases. An isolated ECA of width w will repeat its pattern of states by the Poincar´e
time tP = 2w (violating Deﬁnition 1). If we instead considered a CA of width w as a subsystem of a larger ECA it would not
necessarily repeat within 2w time steps, but it would not be innovative (violating Deﬁnition 2). Thus, as stated, we can exclude
trivial examples such as ECA Rule 30, or other unbounded but non-innovative dynamical processes, which repeatedly apply the
same update rule. A list of model parameters are summarized in Table 1.

To exclude trivial unbounded cases, Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 are constructed to require that the dynamical rules themselves
evolve in time. As we will show, utilizing the set of 256 possible ECA rules as the rule space for CA with time-dependent rules
makes both UE and INN possible. Rules can be stochastically or deterministically evolved, and we explore both mechanisms
here. We note that there exists a huge number of possible variants one might consider. We therefore focus on three variants that
display important mechanisms implicated in generating OEE, including openness to an environment10 (of varying degrees in all
three variants), state-dependent dynamics (regarded as a hallmark feature of life19, 21, 22), and stochasticity. Here openness to an
environment is parameterized by the degree to which the rule evolution of o depends on the state (or rule) of o, as compared to
its dependence on the state of e. Completely open systems are regarded as depending only on external factors, such that the
time-dependence of the rule evolution is only a function of the environment. We also consider cases that are only partially open,
where the rule evolution depends on both extrinsic and intrinsic factors.

Case I
The ﬁrst variant, Case I, implements state-dependent update rules, such that the evolution of o depends on its own state and that
of its environment. This is intended to provide a model that captures the hypothesized self-referential dynamics underlying
biological systems (see e.g. Goldenfeld and Woese21) while also being open to an environment (we do not consider closed
self-referential systems herein as treated in Pavlic et al since these do not permit the possibility of UE26). We consider two
coupled subsystems o and e, where the update rule of o is state-dependent and is a function the state and rule of o, and the
state of e at the same time t (thus being self-referential but also open to perturbations from an external system). That is, the
update rule of o takes on the functional form ro(t + 1) = f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)), where so and ro are the state and rule of the
organism respectively, and se is the state of the environment. We regard this case as only partly open to an environment since
the evolution of the rule of o depends on its own state (and rule) in addition to the state of its environment. By contrast, the

5/37

Table 1. Table of terms and model parameters.

Parameter Deﬁnition

o
e
so
ro
se
wo
we
tP
tr
t(cid:48)
r
I
µ
ξ
C
k

Single organism execution
Single environment execution
state of o
rule of o
state of e
width of o
width of e
Poincar´e recurrence time
Recurrence time of so
Recurrence time of ro
Innovation calculated as the normalized number of rule transitions
Mutation threshold of Case III variant µ = [0, 1)
random noise for Case III variant, ξ = [0, 1)
Compressibility
Lyapunov exponent

subsystem e is closed to external perturbation and evolves according to a ﬁxed rule (such that e is an ECA ). Both o and e
have periodic boundary conditions (o is only open in the sense that its rule evolution is in part externally driven). A schematic
illustration of the time evolution of an ECA, and the coupling between subsystems in a Case I CA is shown in Figure 2.

To demonstrate how the organism in our example of a Case I CA changes its update rule, we provide a simple illustrative
example of the particular function f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)) implemented in this work (see 3 and Supplement 1.1). Speciﬁcally, we
utilize an update function that takes advantage of the binary representation of ECA. An example of the structure of an ECA rule
is shown for Rule 30 in Fig. 2. ECA rules are structured such that each successive bit in the binary representation of the rule is
the output of one of the 23 possible ordered sets of triplet states. The left panel of Fig. 3 shows an example of a few times
steps of the evolution of an organism o of width wo = 4 (right) coupled to an environment e with width we = 6 (left), where o
implemented rule 30 at t − 1. At each time-step t the frequency of each of the 23 ordered triplet states (listed in the top row of
Fig. 2) in the state of o is compared to the frequency of the same ordered triplet in the state of e. If the frequency in o meets or
exceeds the frequency in e for a given triplet, the bit corresponding to the output of that triplet in the rule of o is ﬂipped from
0 ↔ 1. For the example in the left panel of Fig. 3, the triplet frequencies are listed in the table in the right panel of Fig. 3. We
note that for our implementation, the frequency of a triplet in o is calculated relative to the total number of possible triplets in
so, which is 4 in this example (and likewise for e, with 6 possible triplets in the current state). We compare the frequency only
for those triplets that appear in the state of o at time t. In the table, only the triplet 101 is expressed more frequently in the
organism o than in the environment e. The interaction between o and e changes ro from Rule 30 at time-step t to Rule 62 at
t + 1, as shown in Fig. 3. The rule may change by more than one bit in its binary representation in a single time step if multiple
triplets meet the criteria to change the organism’s update rule.

We note that we do not expect the qualitative features of Case I CA reported here to depend on the precise form of the
state-dependent update rule as presented, so long as the update of ro depends on the state and rule of o, and the state of e (that
is, o is self-referential and open – see Pavlic et al.26 for an example of non-open self-referencing CA that does not display UE).
We explored some variants to this rule-changing mechanism. None of our variants signiﬁcantly changed the statistics of the
results, indicating that the qualitative features of the dynamics do not depend on the exact (and somewhat parochial) details
of the example presented herein. Instead, we regard the important part to be the general feature of self-reference coupled to
openness to an environment that is driving the interesting features of the dynamics observed, where we can focus on just one
example in this study for computational tractability in generating large ensemble statistics. The example implemented here was
chosen since it takes explicit advantage of the structure of ECA rules (by ﬂipping bits in the rule table) to provide a simple,
open state-dependent mechanism for producing interesting dynamics.

Case II
We introduce a second variant of CA, Case II, that is similarly composed of two spatially segregated, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional
CA: an organism o and an environment e. As with Case I, the environment e is an execution of an ECA, and is evolved
according to a ﬁxed rule drawn from the set of 256 possible ECA rules. The key difference between Case I and Case II CA is

6/37

Figure 2. Illustrations of the time evolution of a standard ECA (left) and of a Case I state-dependent CA (right). ECA evolve
according to a ﬁxed update rule (here Rule 30), with the same rule implemented at each time step. In an ECA rule table, the cell
representation of all possible binary ordered triplets is shown in the top row, with the cell representation of the corresponding
mapping arising from Rule 30 shown below. Rule 30 therefore has the binary representation 00011110. In a Case I CA (right),
the environment subsystem e evolves exactly like an ECA with a ﬁxed rule. The organism subsystem o, by contrast, updates its
rule at each time-step depending on its rule at the previous time-step, its own state (green arrows) and the state of e (red arrows).
The new rule for o is then implemented to update the state of o (blue arrows). The rules are therefore time-dependent in a
manner that is a function of the states of o and e and the past history of o (through the dependence on the rule at the previous
time-step).

7/37

Figure 3. Example of the implementation of a Case I organism in our example. Shown is an organism o of width wo = 4,
coupled to an environment e with width we = 6, where the rule of o at time step t is ro(t) = 30. (a) At each time step t, the
frequency of ordered triplets are compared in the state of the organism and that of the environment, so and se respectively, and
used to update ro(t) → ro(t + 1) (see text for algorithm description). (b) Table of the calculated frequency of ordered triplets in
the state of the environment and in the state of the organism for time step t shown in the left panel. (c) Update of ro from Rule
30 to Rule 62, based on the frequency of triplets in the table (b).

8/37

that for Case II, the the update rule of the subsystem o depends only on the state of the external environment e and is therefore
independent of the current state or rule of o – that is, o is not self-referential in this example. Case II CA emulate systems
where the rules for dynamical evolution are modulated exclusively by the time evolution of an external system. We consider
o in this example to be more open to its environment than for Case I, since the rule evolution of o depends only on e. The
functional form of Case II rule evolution may be written as ro(t + 1) = f (se(t)), where ro is the rule of o and se is the state of
the environment (see Supplement 1.2). For the example presented here, we implement a map f that takes se(t) → ro(t) that is
1 : 1 from the state of e to the binary representation of the rule of o (determined according to Wolfram’s binary classiﬁcation
scheme). Therefore for the implementation of Case II in our example the environment must be of width we = 8.

Case III
The ﬁnal variant, Case III, is composed of a single, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional CA with periodic boundary conditions, which is
identiﬁed as the organism o. Like with Case II, the rule evolution of Case III is driven externally and does not depend on o.
However, here the external environment e is stochastic noise and not an ECA. The subsystem o has a time-dependent rule where
each bit in the rule table is ﬂipped with a probability µ (“mutation rate”) at each time step. In functional form, the subsystem o
updates its rule such that ro(t + 1) = f (ro(t), ξ ), where ro is the rule of o, and ξ is a random number drawn from the interval
[0, 1) (see Supplement 1.3). At each time step, for each bit in the rule table, a random number ξ is drawn, and if ξ is above a
threshold µ, that bit is ﬂipped 0 ↔ 1 at that time step. This implements a diffusive-random walk through ECA rule space. Since
the rule of o at time t + 1, ro(t + 1), depends on the rule at time t, ro(t), the dynamics of Case III CA are history-dependent in a
similar manner to Case I (both rely on ﬂipping bits in ro(t), where Case I do so deterministically as a function of so and se, and
Case III do so stochastically). In this example, o is also more open to its environment than in Case I since the organism’s rule
does not depend on so, but it is less open than Case II since the rule does depend on the previous organism rule used.

Table 2. Table of cellular automata variants, and the functional form of the rule evolution of o.

CA Variant
Case I
Case II
Case III
ECA (Isolated)

Environment, e
Organism Rule Evolution
ro(t + 1) = f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)) ECA, varied we
ro(t + 1) = f (se(t))
ro(t + 1) = f (ro(t), ξ )
ro(t + 1) = ro(t)

ECA, we = 8
Heat bath
None

All three variants are summarized in Table 2 (see Supplement 1), where the functional dependencies of the rule evolution in
each example are explicitly compared. Since we restrict the rule space for Cases I–III to that of ECA rules only, the trajectories
of ECA with periodic boundary conditions provides a well-deﬁned set of isolated counterfactual trajectories with which to
evaluate Deﬁnitions 1 and 2. For comparison to isolated systems, we evaluate all ECA of width wo, where wo is the width of
the “organism” subsystem o. We test the capacity for each of the three cases presented to generate OEE against Deﬁnitions 1
and 2 in a statistically rigorous manner, and compare the efﬁcacy of the different mechanisms implemented in each case.

Experimental Methods
For Cases I - III, we evolve o with periodic boundary conditions (such that interaction with the environment is only through
the rule evolution). For Cases I and II, e is also a CA with periodic boundary conditions. For Case I, where we must also be
speciﬁed, we consider systems with we = 1/2wo, wo, 3/2wo, 2wo and 5/2wo , where wo is the width o. For Case II, we = 8
for all simulations, since this permits a 1:1 map from the possible states of e to the rule space of ECA. Results for Case III
are given for organism rule mutation rate µ = 0.5, such that each outcome bit in the rule evolution has a 50% probability of
ﬂipping at every time step for ξ drawn from the interval [0, 1) (a bit ﬂips when µ > ξ ). Other values of µ were explored, with
qualitatively similar results (see Supplement Fig. S4).

The number of possible executions grows exponentially large with width wo, limiting the computational tractability of
statistically rigorous sampling. We therefore explored small CA with wo = 3, 4, . . . 7 and sampled a representative subspace of
each (see Supplement 2). For each system sampled, we measured the recurrence times of the rule (t(cid:48)
r) and state (tr) trajectories
for o. For Case III CA, which are stochastic, all simulations eventually terminated as a random oscillation between the all
‘0‘ state and the all ‘1‘ state. We therefore used the timescale of reaching this oscillatory attractor as a proxy for the state
recurrence time tr. In cases where tr > tP or t(cid:48)
o for isolated ECA (Deﬁnition 1), and the state trajectory was
not produced by any ECA execution of width wo (Deﬁnition 2), the system is considered to exhibit OEE.

r > tP, where tP = 2w

We measured the complexity of the resulting interactions by calculating relative compressibility, C, and by the system’s
sensitivity based upon Lyapunov exponents, k27 (see Supplement 8). Large values of C indicate low Kolmogorov-Chaitin
complexity, meaning the output can be produced by a simple (short) program. Large values of k indicate complex dynamics,
with trajectories that rapidly diverge for small perturbations such as occurs in deterministic chaos27. These values are compared

9/37

Table 3. Percentage of sampled cases displaying OEE (satisfying Deﬁnitions 1 and 2) for each CA variant. Rows are organism
width, wo, and columns correspond to the three different CA variants and ECA statistics.

wo ECA Case I (wo = we) Case II Case III
3
4
5
6
7

7.42
1.05
2.76
5.2 × 10−3
4.7 × 10−4

42.47
11.54
10.43
0.27
0.7

0.02
0.38
3.41
0.03
1.06

0
0
0
0
0

to those of ECA. Additionally, ECA rules are often categorized in terms of four Wolfram complexity classes, I - IV24. Class I
and II are considered simple because all initial patterns evolve quickly into a stable or oscillating, homogeneous state. Class
III and IV rules are viewed as generating more complex dynamics. We use the complexity classes of the rules utilized in
time-dependent rule evolution to determine whether the complexity of time-dependent CAs is a product of the ECA rules
implemented, or if it is generated through the mechanism of time-dependence.

Results

The vast majority of executions sampled from all three CA variants were innovative by Deﬁnition 2, with > 99% of Case II
and Case III CAs displaying INN. For Case I CA, the percentage of INN cases increased as a function of both wo and we,
ranging from ∼ 30% for the smallest CA explored to > 99% for larger systems (see Supplement 5). This is intuitive, since the
majority of organisms with changing updates rules should be expected to exhibit different state-trajectories than ECA. The
fact that > 99% of organisms are innovative in our examples may seem to indicate that INN is trivial. However, we note that
INN conceptually becomes more signiﬁcant when considering inﬁnite systems (where UE is not deﬁned) or large systems
where tP is not measurable (and thus UE cannot be calculated). We show below that INN scales with recurrence time, and the
amount of innovation is a good proxy for UE. INN is therefore useful to the analysis of large or inﬁnite systems where the
methods implemented here to detail candidate mechanisms are not directly applicable to test UE. INN is also necessary to
exclude trivial OEE. We also note that for computational tractability we compare the time evolution of o only to ECA, but in
practice one could (and perhaps should) compare o to dynamical systems evolved according to any ﬁxed rule (e.g. regardless of
neighborhood size, which for ECA is n = 3), in which case we might expect the number of INN cases to decrease and therefore
INN would be more non-trivial even for small systems.

By contrast to cases exhibiting INN, OEE cases are much rarer, even for our highly simpliﬁed examples, due to the fact that
the number of UE cases is much smaller, typically representing < 5% of all the sampled trajectories in the examples studied
here. We therefore focus discussion primarily on sampled executions meeting the criteria for OEE, i.e. those that satisﬁed
Deﬁnitions 1, before returning to how INN might approximate UE.

Open-Ended Evolution in CA variants.
The percentage of sampled cases for each CA variant that satisfy Deﬁnitions 1 for UE are shown in Table 3, where for purposes
of more direct comparison Case I CA statistics are shown only for wo = we. Case I CA statistics for other relative values of wo
and we are shown in Table 4. Box plots of the distribution of measured recurrence times for each CA variant are shown in Fig. 5
and Fig. 6. All UE cases presented here are also INN, and thus exhibit OEE. We therefore refer to UE and OEE interchangeably
(without explicitly referencing OEE as cases exhibiting UE and INN separately). Examples of Case I CA exhibiting OEE are
shown in Fig. 4, demonstrating the innovative patterns that can emerge due to time dependent rules.

To compare the capacity for OEE across the different CA variants tested, it is useful to deﬁne a notion of scalability17. Here
we deﬁne scalable systems as ones where the number of observed OEE cases can increase without the need to either (1) change
the rule-updating mechanism of o or (2) signiﬁcantly change the statistics of sampled cases. By this deﬁnition, the two primary
mechanisms for increasing the number of OEE cases in a scalable manner are by changing wo, or depending on the nature of
the coupling between o and e, changing we (with the constraint that the rule-updating mechanism cannot change).

As expected (by deﬁnition), isolated ECA do not exhibit any OEE cases and the majority of ECA have recurrence times
tr (cid:28) tp. However, all three CA variants with time-dependent rules do exhibit examples of OEE, but differ in the percentage
of sampled cases and their scalability. Case III exhibits the simplest dynamics, where trajectories follow a diffusive random
walk through rule space until the system converges on a random oscillation between the all- (cid:48)0(cid:48) and all-(cid:48)1(cid:48) states (where tr is
approximated by this convergence time). The frequency of state recurrence times tr of the organism decreases exponentially
(see Supplement Fig. S4), such that the o with the longest recurrence times are exponentially rare. Since so few examples were
found for organisms of size wo = 7, we also tested wo = 8 and found no examples of OEE. In general, the exponential decline

10/37

Figure 4. Examples of Case I CA exhibiting OEE. In each panel the environment e is shown on the left, and organism o on
the right. For each o, the Poincar´e recurrence time (tP) for an isolated system is highlighted in blue, and the recurrence time of
the states of o, tr, is highlighted in red.

Table 4. Percentage of sampled cases displaying OEE (satisfying Deﬁnitions 1 and 2) for Case I, with varying environment
size we.

wo
3
4
5
6
7

1
2 wo wo
0
0
0
0
0

0.02
0.38
3.41
0.03
1.06

3
2 wo
6.52
2.28
7.04
2.15
2.95

2wo
10.81
2.94
7.5
2.64
4.39

5
2 wo
28.14
9.65
8.64
5.82
5.34

observed is steeper for increasing wo. Observing more OEE cases therefore requires exponentially increasing the number of
sampled trajectories for increasing wo. The capacity for Case III CA to demonstrate OEE is therefore not scalable with system
size (violating condition 2) in our deﬁnition above). An additional limitation of Case III CA is that their the long-term dynamics
are relatively simple once the system settles into the oscillatory attractor, thus the majority of observations of Case III CA
would not yield interesting dynamics (e.g. if the observation time were much greater than the start time tobs (cid:29) to).

For Case II, we also observed a steep decline in the number of OEE cases observed for increasing wo (Table 3). This is
reﬂected by a steady decrease in the mean of the recurrence times for increasing wo, as shown in Fig. 6. We also tested a large
statistical sample of organisms of size wo ≥ 8 for Case II CA (not shown) and found no examples of OEE cases. This is not
wholly unexpected. For Case II with wo = 8, the environment and organism are the same size (we = wo). Therefore e and o
share the same Poincar´e time tP = 2wo. The subsystem e is a traditional ECA, therefore the majority of e will exhibit recurrence
times (cid:28) tP (see e.g. trend in Fig. 6). Since the rule of o is determined by a 1:1 map from the state of e, the rule recurrence time
of o will also be much less than the Poincar´e time, such that t(cid:48)
r (cid:28) tP. It is the rule evolution that drives novelty in the state
evolution, we therefore also see that the state recurrence time is similarly limited such that tr (cid:28) tP also holds. To get around
this limitation one could increase the size of the environment such that we > wo. However, since the rule for o is a 1:1 map
from the state of e, this would require changing the updating rule scheme for o. That is, the organism o would have to change
how it evolves in time as a function of its environment (violating 1) in our deﬁnition of scalability above. By our deﬁnition of
scalability, this is not a scalable mechanism for generating OEE since o must change the function for its updating rule and
therefore would represent a different o.

We can compare the statistics of sampled OEE cases for Case I where wo = we to those of Case II and Case III, as in Table
3. While Case II and Case III CA see a steep drop-off in the percentage of sampled cases exhibiting OEE with increasing
organism size wo, the Case I CA exhibit a ﬂatter trend. We determined whether this trend holds for varying we by also analyzing
statistics for Case I CA where we = 1
2 wo. The statistics of OEE cases sampled are shown in Table 4 and

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

11/37

box plots of the distribution of recurrence times are shown in Fig. 5. For each ﬁxed environment size explored (we, columns in
Table 4), we observe that the statistics do not decrease dramatically as the size of the organism increases (increasing wo). For
ﬁxed organism size (wo, rows in Table 4), we observe that the number of OEE cases increases with increasing environment size.
These trends are also reﬂected in the means of the distributions shown in Fig. 5. Case I represents a scalable mechanism for
OEE as o can be coupled to larger environments and will produce more OEE cases.

Case I and Case II can be contrasted to gain insights into scalability. The key difference between the two variants is that for
Case II the update rule of o is a 1:1 map with the state of e, whereas for Case I the map is self-referencing and is many:1. Case I
therefore uses a coarse-grained representation of the environment for updating the rule of o and because the dynamics are
self-referential, the same pattern in the environment can lead to different rule transitions in o, depending on the previous state
and rule of o. Thus, although both Case I and Case II exhibit trends of increasing OEE as we is increased relative to wo, the
degree to which the size of the environment can impact the time evolution of the organism is different for the two cases. For a
comparable size environment in Case I and Case II CA, the pattern relevant to the update of o may have a longer recurrence
time than the actual states of e for Case I CA (due to the coarse-graining), whereas for Case II CA this pattern is strictly limited
by the environment’s recurrence time. Additionally, due to the coarse-graining of the environment in Case I CA, the update
rule of o is not dependent on the size of e: the same exact function for updating the rule of o may be applied independent
of the environment size. This is not true for Case II, where the function for updating the rule of o must change in order to
accommodate larger environments.

INN as a proxy for UE
We have presented examples of small dynamical systems to perform rigorous statistical testing of INN and UE to evaluate
candidate mechanisms for generating OEE. An important question is how the results might apply to larger dynamical systems
that could depend on different mechanisms than those testable in simple, discrete systems. While an approximation of INN
is in principle measurable for large or inﬁnite dynamical systems, UE is not measurable or not well-deﬁned. We therefore
aimed to determine if INN can be utilized as a proxy for UE. To do so, we deﬁned a new parameter nr, which quantiﬁes the
number of times that an organism changed its update rule between two successive time steps in its dynamical evolution. We
normalized to determine the relative innovation of an organism I = nr
2w to generate a standardized measure for comparing
across example organisms in our study. Statistically representative results for Case I and Case II organisms are shown in
Fig. 7, where I is plotted against the organism’s state recurrence time (Case III results are not included since the recurrence
time is not well-deﬁned). For both Case I and Case II a clear trend is apparent where innovation is positively (and nearly
linearly) correlated with recurrence time. For a given recurrence time, OEE cases (highlighted in red) are the most innovative.
Comparing the two panels, it is evident that Case I CA exhibit higher innovation and therefore achieve longer recurrence times
than Case II CA. From these results we can conclude that a statistical measure sampling the number of observed rule transitions
could be used as a proxy for UE, which we leave as a subject for future work.

On-going Generation of Complexity in Case I
We also considered the complexity of Case I CA, relative to isolated ECA, as a further test of their scalability and potential to
generate complex and novel dynamics. We characterized the complexity of Case I using two standard complexity measures,
compressibility (C) and Lyapunov exponent (k). The trends demonstrate that in general C decreases with increasing organisms
width wo, but increases with increasing environment size we (left panel, Fig. 8), indicative of increasing complexity with
organism width wo. Similar trends are observed for the Lyapunov exponent, as shown in the right panel of Fig. 8, where it is
evident that increasing wo or we leads to an increasing number of cases with higher Lyapunov exponent k. OEE cases tend to
have the highest k values (see Supplement Fig. S12). As C is normalized relative to ECA (see Supplement 8), we conclude that
Case I CA are generally more complex than ECA evolved according to ﬁxed dynamical rules, and this is especially true for
OEE cases.

We also analyzed the ECA rules implemented in sampled Case I trajectories relative to the Wolfram Rule complexity
classes. We ﬁnd that Case I CA, on average, implement more Class I and II rules than Class III or IV, as shown in the frequency
distribution of Fig. 9 for Case I CA with wo = we (see Supplement Fig. 5 and 6). Thus, we can conclude that the complexity
generated by Case I CA is intrinsic to the state-dependent mechanism, and is not attributable to Class III and Class IV ECA
rules dominating the rule evolution of o.

Discussion

We have provided formal deﬁnitions of unbounded evolution (UE) and innovation (INN) that can be evaluated in any ﬁnite
dynamical system, provided it can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e. Systems satisfying both UE and
INN we expect to minimally represent mechanisms capable OEE. Testing the criteria for UE and INN against three different

12/37

Figure 5. Distribution of recurrence times tr for the state trajectory of o for Case I CA. From top to bottom are distributions
for we = 1wo, wo, 3wo, 2wo and 5wo, respectively. In all panels the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1 (shown on a
log scale). Sampled trajectories displaying UE occur for tr/tP > 1.

13/37

Figure 6. Distribution of recurrence times tr for the state trajectory of o for ECA (top left), Case II (top right), and Case III
CA (bottom). In all panels the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale). Sampled trajectories
displaying UE occur for tr/tP > 1.

14/37

Figure 7. Relative innovation as a function of recurrence times for Case I (left) and Case II (right) CA. Highlighted in red are
cases exhibiting OEE.

CA models with time-dependent rules reveals what we believe to be quite general mechanisms applicable to a broad class of
OEE systems.

Mechanisms for OEE
Our analysis indicates that there are potentially many time-dependent mechanisms that can produce OEE in a subsystem
o embedded within a larger dynamical system, but that some may be more interesting than others. An externally driven
time-dependence for the rules of o (Case II), while producing the highest statistics of OEE cases sampled for small o, does not
provide a scalable mechanism for producing OEE with increasing system size, unless the structure of o itself is fundamentally
altered (such that the rule space changes). Stochastically driven rule evolution displays rich transient dynamics, but ultimately
subsystems converge on dynamics with low complexity (Case III). An alternative is to introduce stochasticity to the states,
rather than the rules, which would avert this issue. This has the drawback that the mechanism for OEE is then not as clearly
mappable to biological processes (or other mechanisms internal to the system), where the genotype (rules) evolve due to random
mutations that then dictate the phenotype (states).

We regard Case I as the most interesting mechanism explored herein for generating conditions favoring OEE: it is scalable
and the dynamics generated are novel. We note that the state-dependent mechanism represents a departure from more traditional
approaches to modeling dynamical systems, e.g. as occurs in the physical sciences, where the dynamical rule is usually
assumed to be ﬁxed. In particular, it represents an explicit form of top-down causation, often regarded as a key mechanism
in emergence19, 28 that could also play an important role in driving major evolutionary transitions29. The state-dependent
mechanism is also consistent with an important hallmark of biology – that biological systems appear to implement self-
referential dynamics such that the “laws” in biology are a function of the states19, 21, 22, a feature that also appears to be
characteristic of the evolution of language30, 31.

Applicability to Other Dynamical Systems
We have independently explored openness to an environment, stochasticity and state-dependent dynamics as we expect these
to be general and apply to a wide-range of dynamical systems that might similarly display OEE by satisfying Deﬁnitions 1
and 2. An important feature of these deﬁnitions is that UE and INN must be driven by extrinsic factors (an environment)32,
although the mechanisms driving the dynamics characteristic of OEE should be intrinsic to the subsystem of interest. OEE can
therefore only be a property of a subsystem. We have not explored the case of feedback from o to e that might drive further
open-ended dynamics, as characteristic of the biosphere, for example in niche construction33, but expect even richer dynamics
to be observed in such cases. For large or inﬁnite dynamical systems INN is an effective proxy for UE, and we expect highly
innovative systems to be the most likely candidates for open-ended evolution.

15/37

Figure 8. Heat maps of compression C (left) and Lyapunov exponent values k (right) for all state trajectories of sampled o for
Case I CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, with distributions shown for we = 1
2 wo (from top
to bottom in each panel, respectively) for each wo. Distributions are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for each
wo and we (see statistics in Table S3).

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

Figure 9. Rank ordered frequency distributions of rules implemented in the attractor dynamics of o for all sampled Case I CA
(top) and OEE cases only (bottom). Highlighted are Wolfram Class III (light blue) and IV rules (dark blue).

16/37

Conclusions

Our results demonstrate that OEE, as formalized herein, is a general property of dynamical systems with time-dependent
rules. This represents a radical departure from more traditional approaches to dynamics where the “laws” remain ﬁxed. Our
results suggest that uncovering the principles governing open-ended evolution and innovation in biological and technological
systems may require removing the segregation of states and ﬁxed dynamic laws characteristic of the physical sciences for
the last 300 years. In particular, state-dependent dynamics have been shown to out-perform other candidate mechanisms in
terms of scalability, suggestive of paths forward for understanding OEE. Our analysis connects all four hallmarks of OEE and
provides a mechanism for producing OEE that is consistent with the self-referential nature of living systems. By casting the
formalism of OEE within the broader context of dynamical systems theory, the proof-of-principle approach presented opens up
the possibility of ﬁnding unifying principles of OEE that encompass both biological and artiﬁcial systems.

Supplementary Materials

Description of Implementations of Time-Dependent Cellular Automata Variants
We consider three new variants of cellular automata (CA) to identify mechanism(s) that can produce conditions necessary for
open-ended evolution (OEE) in bounded regions, subject to the formal criteria for OEE laid out in Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 in the
main text. We consider deﬁnitions of unbounded evolution (UE) and innovation (INN) that are applicable to any instance of
a dynamical system u that can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e. Each CA variant implements time-
dependent rules for o, with different functional forms f for this time-dependence. Here we describe in detail the implementation
of each variant considered.

Case I: Deterministic State-Dependent Rules in Subsystem o
The ﬁrst variant, Case I, implements state-dependent update rules. Case I CA are composed of two spatially separate, ﬁxed-
width, 1-dimensional CA: an “organism” o and an environment e. Both o and e are implemented with periodic boundary
conditions, and utilize the alphabet {0, 1}. The environment e is an execution of an ECA, and is evolved according to a ﬁxed
rule drawn from the set of 256 possible ECA rules, with periodic boundary conditions.

The subsystem o updates its rule according to a function f such that ro(t + 1) = f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)), where so and ro are
the state and rule of the organism and se is the state of the environment. It is evolved with periodic boundary conditions. The
expressed ECA rule of o at time t, ro(t), is represented by the eight-bit binary representation of its rule table24, e.g. an o
implementing Rule 30 at time t will have ro(t) = [0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0] (see main text Fig. 3). We refer to individual bits within
the rule by the index i such that ro(t)[1] = 0, ro(t)[2] = 0, ro(t)[3] = 0, ro(t)[4] = 1 etc. for an o implementing Rule 30 at time
t. The binary representation of ECA rules are structured such that each successive bit i iterated in this manner represents the
output of application of the rule to the ordered set of triplet states S3 = [111, 110, 101, 100, 011, 010, 001, 000].

The function f for our example implementation of state-dependent CA is constructed such that at each time-step t it
compares the normalized frequency of each triplet i in S3 in the state of o and e, so(t) and se(t), respectively, and ﬂips the
corresponding bit i in ro(t) if i is expressed in so and the normalized frequency of the triplet in so(t) meets or exceeds the
normalized frequency in se(t) (where the frequency is normalized relative to the number of possible triplets in the state). That
is, at each time-step t, a bit i in ro(t) will ﬂip 0 ↔ 1 if ni(so(t)) ≥ ni(se(t)), where ni counts the relative frequency of triplet i.
Formally,

(cid:40)

ro(t + 1)[i] =

ro(t)[i]
ro(t)[i]

if ni(so(t)) ≥ ni(se(t))
if ni(so(t)) < ni(se(t))

where the overbar represents logical negation.

An example implementation of this update function is shown in Fig. 4 in the main text, where an “organism” o with wo = 4
is coupled to an environment e with we = 6, and ro(t) = [0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0]. In the example, only for i = 3, corresponding to
the triplet {1, 0, 1}, is n3(so(t)) ≥ n3(se(t)). Therefore, ro(t + 1)[3] = ro(t)[3] = ¯0 = 1, as shown schematically in Fig. 5 in the
main text. In this example, the interaction of o and e under f changes ro from Rule 30 at time-step t to Rule 62 at t + 1.

Case II: Deterministic Time-Dependent Rules in Subsystem o
The second variant, Case II, is similarly composed of two spatially separate, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional CA: an “organism”
o and an environment e. As with Case I, both o and e are implemented with periodic boundary conditions, and utilize the
alphabet {0, 1}. The environment e is an execution of an ECA, and is evolved according to a ﬁxed rule drawn from the set of
256 possible ECA rules, just as in Case I.

(1)

17/37

The key difference between Case I and Case II CA is that for Case II, the subsystem o updates its rule according to a
function f such that ro(t + 1) = f (se(t)). That is, for Case II the update rule of o depends only on the state of the external
environment se and is independent of the current state or rule of o (that is, o is not self-referential). Formally,

ro(t + 1)[i] = se(t)[i]

Here ro(t) is determined uniquely by se(t), such that the binary representation of each possible state of the environment uniquely
maps to one ECA rule according to Wolfram’s binary classiﬁcation scheme24. For this implementation the environment must be
of width we = 8 to mediate a bijective map between {se} and {ro}. Case II CA emulate systems where the rules for dynamical
evolution are modulated exclusively by the time evolution of an external system.

Case III: Stochastic Time-Dependent Rules in Subsystem o
The ﬁnal variant, Case III, is composed of a single, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional CA: the “organism” o. Like Case II, the rule
evolution of Case III is driven externally and does not depend on so. However, here the external environment e is stochastic noise
and not an ECA. In Case III CA, the subsystem o updates its rule according to a function f such that ro(t + 1) = f (ro(t), ξ ),
where ξ introduces random ﬂuctuations in the implemented rule of o by stochastically ﬂipping bits in ro. Formally,

ro(t + 1)[i] =

(cid:40)

ro(t)[i]
ro(t)[i]

if ξ < µ
if ξ ≥ µ

where µ is a ﬁxed threshold for ﬂipping between [0, 1), and ξ is a random number drawn from the interval [0, 1). This
implements a diffusive-random walk through ECA rule space. Since the rule of o at time t + 1, ro(t + 1), depends on the rule at
time t, ro(t), the dynamics of Case III CA are path-dependent in a similar manner to Case I (both rely on ﬂipping bits in ro(t),
where Case I do so deterministically as a function of so and se, and Case III do so stochastically).

Table 5. The size of the randomly sampled subspace for Case I CA for each wo and we explored.

#u

% Explored CA Variant wo

#u

% Explored

CA Variant wo
Case I:
we = 1

3

2 wo

Case I:
we = wo

Case I:
we = 3

2 wo

2.1×106

4.19×106
1.68×107
3.36×107
1.34×108

4.19×106

1.68×107
6.71×107
2.68×108
1.07×109

1.25

1.25
0.62
0.62
0.31

0.63

0.31
0.16
7.81×10−2
3.91×10−2

8.34×106

0.28

6.71×107
2.68×108
2.15×109
8.59×109

6.92×10−2
3.75×10−2
2.52×10−3
1.24×10−3

4
5
6
7

3

4
5
6
7

3

4
5
6
7

Case I:
we = 2wo

Case I:
we = 5

2 wo

3

4
5
6
7

3

4
5
6
7

3.36×107

6.92×10−2

2.68×108
2.15×109
1.72×1010
1.37×1011

1.73×10−2
4.69×10−3
3.16×10−4
7.75×10−5

6.71×107

3.91×10−2

1.074×109
8.59×108
1.37×1011
1.1×1012

4.88×10−2
1.22×10−3
1.53×10−4
3.81×10−5

Experimental Methods
The number of possible executions grows exponentially large with wo, limiting the computational tractability of statistically
rigorous sampling of the dynamics of each CA variant and of generating the set of counterfactual isolated ECA trajectories.
We therefore explored small CA with wo = 3, 4, . . . 7 and sampled a representative subset of all possible trajectories for each
wo (see Section for examples of larger CA). We then generated statistics on the number of sampled trajectories satisfying
Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 for unbounded evolution and innovation, respectively.

(2)

(3)

18/37

Case I Experiments
For Case I, we must be speciﬁed in addition to wo. We consider systems with we = 1
2 wo . For
comparison to Case II and Case III CA, we = wo statistics are used. For each wo and we, the initial state of o, so(0), the initial
state of e, se(0), the initial rule of o, ro(0) and the rule of e, re, are drawn at random. For r0(0) and re, we only consider the
88 non-equivalent ECA rules, which dramatically reduces the number of possible cases, but still covers the full spectrum of
complexity in initial conﬁgurations. We then permit ro to evolve into any of the 256 possible ECA rules. We also ensure that no
two cases sampled are initialized with the same tuple {so(0), se(0), ro(0), re}.

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

The space of all possible Case I CA executions is too large to explore the full space computationally. Since each e and o are

each initiated with a state and a rule, the number of possible executions is:

NU = N2

R × NSe × NSo = 882 × 28we × 28wo

(4)

where NR is the number of sampled initial rules for o and e, NSe is the number of sampled initial states for e, and NSo is the
number of sampled initial states for o. For wo = we = 3 and wo = we = 4, exploring the full space of all possible initial
conditions is computationally tractable, and veriﬁes that the statistics reported herein for executions of o that display UE and
INN are characteristic of the full computational space for the smaller sample sizes implemented in this study. The number of
randomly sampled cases for Case I CA included herein is given in Table 5.

Case II Experiments
For Case II, we = 8 for all simulations, since this permits a bijective map from {se} to the rule space of ECA and thus the set of
rules {ro}. As with Case I CA, executions are initialized with a randomized tuple {so(0), se(0), ro(0), re}, ensuring that no two
experiments are initialized with the same tuple. We restrict attention only to we = 8 for Case II experiments in this study to
directly compare to our Case I and Case III CA. The number of randomly sampled cases for Case II CA is given in Table 6.

Table 6. The size of the randomly sampled subspace for Case II CA for each wo explored.

Case III Experiments
For Case III, a threshold µ for stochastic ﬂipping of the bits in the rule table of o must be set. Results for Case III are given
for µ = 0.5 in the main paper, such that each outcome bit in the rule table at every time step ro(t) has a 50% probability of
ﬂipping. Results for other values are reported in Section . Since we evolve only the subsystem o for Case III CA, executions are
initialized with a random tuple {so(0), ro(0)}. We do not restrict sampled executions to unique tuples, since a different random
seed is set for each execution. The number of randomly sampled cases for Case III CA is given in Table 7.

Table 7. The size of the randomly sampled subspace for Case III CA for each wo explored.

CA Variant wo
Case II:
we = 8

3

#u

% Explored

1.34×108

2.31×10−2

2.68×108
5.37×108
1.07×109
2.15×109

2.1×10−2
2.1×10−2
2.1×10−2
1.98×10−2

CA Variant wo
Case III:
Random

3

#u

% Explored

5.24×105

10

1.05×106
2.1×106
4.19×106
8.39×106

5
5
5
5

4
5
6
7

4
5
6
7

Calculating Recurrence Time, Compressibility and Lyapunov Exponent
Recurrence times for the state- and rule-trajectory of o were calculated to identify cases exhibiting UE and thus OEE. The
complexity of the state trajectory {so(0), so(1), . . . so(tr)} was measured by means of its compressibility (C), and calculation of
the Lyapunov exponent (k).

19/37

r and tr for o, for both the rule evolution {ro(t1), ro(t2), ro(t3) . . . ro(t(cid:48)

r when the sequence of states or rules of o, respectively, repeated. In general, tr and t(cid:48)

Recurrence Time
For Cases I and II,we measured the recurrence times t(cid:48)
r)}
and the state evolution {so(t1), so(t2), so(t3) . . . so(tr)}, respectively. Recurrence times were calculated by determining the time
tr or t(cid:48)
r for o are not the same as for the full
system u (or as each other, such that often tr (cid:54)= t(cid:48)
r, see Fig. 1 in the main text). We therefore ﬁrst determined when u repeated
the tuple {so, se, ro} such that {so(t(cid:48)), se(t(cid:48)), ro(t(cid:48))} = {so(t), se(t), ro(t)}, where t < t(cid:48). We then determined the tr such that
{so(tr), so(tr + 1), . . . so(t(cid:48))} = {so(ti), so(ti + 1), . . . so(tr)} for ti < tr (and likewise for t(cid:48)
r with the replacement ro for so). The
time step ti is identiﬁed as initiation of the attractor dynamics for o. In many cases, we ﬁnd attractors that are unbounded and
innovative by Deﬁnitions 1 and 2, in addition to full trajectories up to recurrence. An example illustrating the expected Poincar´e
time for o, tP, its recurrence time for the state trajectory tr and the attractor size for the full system u, ta (up to the recurrence
time t(cid:48) for the full system) is shown in Fig. 10.

Figure 10. Relevant timescales for describing the dynamics of o embedded in u. Shown are the Poincar´e recurrence time tP
(blue) for an isolated ECA of the same width wo as o, the state-trajectory recurrence time tr of o (red), and attractor size of the
full system u, ta (green).

Since Case III CA are stochastically evolved, their dynamics do not repeat with a unique recurrence time tr for o. However,
all executions sampled eventually terminated in an oscillation between the two homogeneous states (all-‘0’s or all-‘1’s). These
states are attractors for every ﬁxed rule ECA evolved under periodic boundary conditions, so once a Case III CA evolves to
either homogeneous state, no heterogeneity will ever be produced (the dynamics behave somewhat like dissipation of the
heterogeneity in the initial state). We therefore consider it more meaningful to calculate the number of time steps before
convergence to this oscillatory attractor in place of the recurrence time tr, which we denote by tr for consistency of notation with
other cases explored. We therefore capture the timescale of relevance for all interesting (and potentially complex) dynamics,
which occur in the transient before converging to this attractor.

Compressibility
The Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity of string s is deﬁned as the size of the shortest computer program p running on a universal
Turing machine U that produces the string s (here s is the sequence of states of o):

Although it cannot be computed exactly, it is lower semi-computable and can be approximated by using a general lossless
compression algorithm L?. This upper-bound approximation of the Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity is normalized according to
a normalized compression measure C:

KU (s) = min{|p|,U(p) = s} .

C(s) =

L(s)
max(Ci(s), length(s))

.

Throughout this paper Ci is output of the Compress algorithm based on the LZW algorithm?. It can be replaced by the output
of any other compression algorithm. The measure is therefore a family of possible indexes approximating K. We use C as

(5)

(6)

20/37

measure over the state-trajectory of the organism o for each execution u, as an approximation of the characteristic complexity
of o in the limit of large times t → ∞.

Large values of C indicate low Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity, meaning the output can be produced by a simple (short)
program p. The normalization constant max(C(s), length(s)) was calculated by measuring the number of bits resulting from
a generalized compression algorithm for the Poincar´e recurrence time of the entire system u, not an isolated organism. This
allows normalizing the observed C to its maximum possible value for an organism coupled to an environment. This closely
approximates an upper limit in C for the longest possible non-repeating trajectory for any given o.

In order to ensure the normalization constant for an organism of width wo is a close approximation to the maximal value,
Ci(s) was calculated for 107 randomly generated ECA of width wo, evolved with a ﬁxed rule for 22w time steps, where w is
the width of u, such that w = wo + we. The maximum of this set was used as the normalization constant max(Ci(s), length(s)).
Thus, all C values are normalized relative to the maximal complexity of a CA evolved according to a ﬁxed dynamical rule.

Lyapunov Exponent
The Lyapunov exponent k captures the speed at which a perturbation moves through a system27, thereby quantifying sensitivity
to initial conditions. In CA, k can be, in general, measured by perturbing a single bit in the initial condition, and counting how
many bits differ compared to the unperturbed time evolution in each time step:

y(t) = Hio[si(t), so(t)]

(7)

where Hio is the Hamming distance between the state of the perturbed system i and the original organism o, which is evaluated
at each time step t. The resulting time series of y(t) values can be approximated as an exponential function, y(t) = ekt , where k
is estimated numerically. High values of k indicate sensitivity to perturbations, which is typically associated with complex
dynamical systems, such as those that occur in deterministic chaos.

Statistics of Sampled Trajectories Displaying Innovation (INN)
Tables 8 and 9 show the resulting statistics for sampled o that were found to be innovative (INN) according to Deﬁnition 2.
Table 8 includes all three CA variants as well as ECA counterfactual trajectories used as a control. Table 9 shows results for
state-dependent Case I CA as a function of varying environment size we. Innovative o were identiﬁed as having a state-trajectory
that cannot be reproduced by any closed, ﬁxed rule ECA of equivalent width w = wo.

Table 8. Percentage of sampled cases displaying INN for each CA variant.

wo ECA Case I (wo = we) Case II Case III
3
4
5
6
7

99.98
99.97
99.97
99.97
99.97

54.62
74.66
92.56
88.14
97.14

99.82
99.87
99.92
99.94
99.97

0
0
0
0
0

Table 9. Percentage of sampled cases displaying INN for Case I, with varying environment size we.

wo we = 1
30.72
3
33.32
4
32.42
5
35.64
6
52.92
7

2 wo we = wo we = 3
70.10
86.57
96.22
97.03
97.43

54.62
74.66
92.56
88.14
97.14

2 wo we = 2wo we = 5
93.29
97.47
98.72
99.29
99.63

86.04
95.52
98.32
98.91
99.51

2 wo

Recurrence time frequency distributions
The frequency distribution of tr observed for sampled state trajectories of o in Case I, Case II and Case III CA are shown
in Figures 11,12 and 13, respectively. Comparing the three cases reveals that for equivalently sized ensembles of sampled
trajectories for Case I, Case II, and Case III CA, the Case I CA generate OEE cases with higher statistical certainty than either
the Case II or Case III CA for most parameters explored. This is especially true for cases where we > wo in Case I simulations.
From Figure 11 it is evident that larger environments yield more UE cases with tr > tP and in general result in longer observed
recurrence times.

21/37

Case II CA yield fewer OEE cases as wo increases, as evident in Figure 12. As discussed in the main text, Case II is not

scalable as it would require changing the structure of the rules of the organism o.

Case III CA generate fewer OEE cases than Case I as the width of o increases, with no cases observed in our statistical
sample for wo > 7 for µ = 0.5 (Figure 11 bottom panel, leftmost column). The frequency distribution of recurrence times for
Case III CA with µ = 0.01, µ = 0.1 and µ = 0.5 are shown in Figure 11. For smaller values of µ OEE cases are observed for
larger wo. In the context of biological evolution, the mechanism for increasing the number of OEE cases under Case III would
therefore be for systems to evolve toward slower mutation rates over time. However, because the distributions are exponentially
distributed, the number of OEE cases is always exponentially suppressed, representing only a small tail of the distribution. A
ﬁxed width wo execution could always be found in a large enough statistical sample that such that the observed tr would be
greater than the maximum recurrence time observed in a Case I CA with an equivalent organism width wo. However, in general
due to the exponential suppression of cases with larger tr for Case III variants (Figure 13), the ensemble size of sampled cases
will necessarily be much larger for Case III CA than for Case I CA. That is, for a sufﬁciently large ensemble size one could
chose a value of µ and generate a trajectory in a width wo organism with a given recurrence time tr, but would always be able
to ﬁnd an example trajectory of the same tr for a smaller sized ensemble of Case I CA for some environment width we. Due
to the exponential suppression, OEE cases are much rarer for Case III than Case I CA. Additionally, once Case III reach the
terminal attractor their dynamics are not complexity, whereas Case I CA will repeat an attractor state that is in general complex
and is often times open-ended (such that the attractor itself satisﬁes Deﬁnitions 1 and 2). We therefore regard Case III to not be
scalable.

22/37

ECA Rule Complexity of Case I CA
To determine if the complexity observed in Case I CA is intrinsic to the state-dependent mechanism, or is an artifact of a
selection-effect favoring complex rules, we determined the frequency of rules implemented in Case I CA utilizing the Wolfram
classiﬁcation scheme for Elementary Cellular Automata24. There are four Wolfram Classes: Class I and II are regarded as the
least complex, often generating simple repeating patterns. Class III rules are more complex displaying random patterns, and
Class IV are regarded as the most complex, displaying rich dynamical structure (for example, ECA Rule 110, which is known
to be Turing Universal? is a Class IV ECA). We analyze the complexity of ECA rules implemented in the rule trajectories
of Case I CA by considering the frequency of implementation of rules from each class to determine if the complexity of the
observed dynamics is an artifact of the ECA rules or intrinsic to f .

The resulting rank ordered frequency distribution of rules is shown in Figure 14 for all sampled Case I CA of a given
organism width wo, and separately for the OEE cases in Figure 15. Since this data includes statistics for the entire sample of
o of a given width wo included in our study, we call these distributions “metagenomes” to indicate that they represent bulk
statistics over many instances of “organisms” o. The resulting distributions indicate that Case I CA primarily implement Class
I and II rules, indicative that the complexity observed is intrinsic to the state-dependent mechanism and not an artifact of
selective use of ‘complex’ Class III and IV ECA rules. This is true for statistics sampled over all Case I CA (Figure 14), as well
as isolating only OEE cases (Figure 15).

23/37

Distributions of Attractor Sizes
Figures 16 - 17 show box-whisker plots of the attractor sizes for the subsystem o for each ECA and for Case I and Case II
CA (Case III CA terminate in a random, oscillatory attractor and the statistics are therefore not included here, see Section
for discussion). In each ﬁgure, the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1, where ta is the attractor size and tP is the
expected Poincar´e time of an equivalent isolated system (an ECA). Sampled attractors exhibiting unbounded evolution (UE)
have ta/tP > 1 and therefore fall above the black solid line - these are examples of OEE attractors.

24/37

Compressibility and Lyapunov Exponent Values for Case I and II CA
Compressibility and Lyapunov exponent for OEE trajectories sampled from Case I CA
Calculated values for compressibility (C) and Lyapunov exponent (k), as deﬁned in Section , are shown in Figure 19 for the
state trajectory of o for all sampled OEE executions for Case I CA. Comparison of the left panel of Figure 19 with the left
panel of Figure 2 in the main text reveals that the observed C for all OEE cases tends to be lower than that calculated over all
sampled o for Case I: that is, the OEE cases exhibit lower C, consistent with intuition that systems with longer recurrence times
should be ’more complex’. As wo increases, more OEE cases tend to have lower C values, such that larger “organisms” are
more complex.

Likewise, comparing the right panel of Figure 19 with the right panel of Figure 2 in the main text indicates that OEE cases
also tend to have much higher k values than that calculated over all sampled o for Case I, indicative of greater sensitivity to
perturbations in OEE systems. Large values of wo lead to larger k, on average, such that larger OEE “organisms” are more
sensitive to perturbations and therefore display richer, more complex dynamics.

25/37

Comparison of compressibility and Lyapunov exponent for Case I and Case II CA
Calculated values for compressibility (C) and Lyapunov exponent (k), as deﬁned in Section , are compared for Case I and Case
II CA in Figures 20 and 21. Case III is not considered as the long-term dynamics display low complexity for the oscillatory
attractor of the homogenous all-’0’ and all-’1’ states. For both Case I and Case II CA variants, increasing wo yields more OEE
cases with lower C values, such that larger “organisms” are more complex (Figure 20).

Case II CA yield lower C values than Case I for the data shown as a result of the difference in the normalization implemented
in Eq. 6, which for Case II CA is lower since the the width of u is w = wo + 8 for all wo explored, whereas for Case I CA the
width of u is w = 2 ∗ wo (for we = wo as shown). Additionally, as noted Case I is scalable as we can be increased to generate
higher complexity (lower C) cases. The Lyapunov exponent for Case II is in general higher than for Case I, indicating greater
sensitivity to perturbations in the initial condition for Case II CA than Case I. For both CA variants, k increases with increasing
organism size k, such that larger organisms are more complex.

26/37

Larger Systems
Figure 22 shows example executions of Case I state-dependent CA for large organisms of width wo = 101, which visually
demonstrate that the novelty of the dynamics reported herein scale to large system sizes.

References

1. Bedau, M. A., Snyder, E. & Packard, N. H. A classiﬁcation of long-term evolutionary dynamics. In Artiﬁcial life VI,

228–237 (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1998).

2. Bettencourt, L. M., Lobo, J., Helbing, D., K¨uhnert, C. & West, G. B. Growth, innovation, scaling, and the pace of life in

cities. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 104, 7301–7306 (2007).

3. Seyfarth, R. M., Cheney, D. L. & Bergman, T. J. Primate social cognition and the origins of language. Trends in cognitive

sciences 9, 264–266 (2005).

4. Buchanan, A., Packard, N. H. & Bedau, M. A. Measuring the evolution of the drivers of technological innovation in the

patent record. Artiﬁcial life 17, 109–122 (2011).

5. Skusa, A. & Bedau, M. A. Towards a comparison of evolutionary creativity in biological and cultural evolution. Artiﬁcial

6. Oka, M., Hashimoto, Y. & Ikegami, T. Open-ended evolution in a web system. Late Breaking Papers at the European

7. Bedau, M. A. et al. Open problems in artiﬁcial life. Artiﬁcial life 6, 363–376 (2000).

8. Banzhaf, W. et al. Deﬁning and simulating open-ended novelty: requirements, guidelines, and challenges. Theory in

9. Taylor, T. J. From artiﬁcial evolution to artiﬁcial life. Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh. College of Science and

Life 8, 233–242 (2003).

Conference on Artiﬁcial Life 17 (2015).

Biosciences 1–31 (2016).

Engineering. School of Informatics. (1999).

67–85 (2008).

10. Ruiz-Mirazo, K., Umerez, J. & Moreno, A. Enabling conditions for open-ended evolution. Biology & Philosophy 23,

11. Bedau, M. Can biological teleology be naturalized? The Journal of Philosophy 647–655 (1991).

12. Bedau, M. A. & Packard, N. H. Measurement of evolutionary activity, teleology, and life. In Langton, I. C., Taylor, C.,
Farmer, D. & Rasmussen, S. (eds.) Artiﬁcial Life II, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity (M. A. Bedau
and N. H. Packard, 1992).

13. Fernando, C., Kampis, G. & Szathm´ary, E. Evolvability of natural and artiﬁcial systems. Procedia Computer Science 7,

14. Ruiz-Mirazo, K. & Moreno, A. Autonomy in evolution: from minimal to complex life. Synthese 185, 21–52 (2012).

15. Guttenberg, N. & Goldenfeld, N. Cascade of complexity in evolving predator-prey dynamics. Physical review letters 100,

73–76 (2011).

058102 (2008).

16. Ruiz-Mirazo, K., Peret´o, J. & Moreno, A. A universal deﬁnition of life: autonomy and open-ended evolution. Origins of

Life and Evolution of the Biosphere 34, 323–346 (2004).

17. Taylor, T. et al. Open-ended evolution: Perspectives from the oee1 workshop in york. Artiﬁcial Life (2016).

18. Zenil, H. Compression-based investigation of the dynamical properties of cellular automata and other systems. Complex

Systems 19, 1–28 (2010).

19. Walker, S. I. & Davies, P. C. The algorithmic origins of life. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 10, 20120869 (2013).

20. Davies, P. C. & Walker, S. I. The hidden simplicity of biology. Reports on Progress in Physics 79, 102601 (2016).

21. Goldenfeld, N. & Woese, C. Life is physics: Evolution as a collective phenomenon far from equilibrium. Annu. Rev.

Condens. Matter Phys. 2, 375–399 (2011).

22. Douglas, R. H. G¨odel, escher, bach: An eternal golden braid (Basic Books, New York, 1979).

23. Noble, D. A theory of biological relativity: no privileged level of causation. Interface Focus 2, 55–64 (2012).

24. Wolfram, S. A New Kind of Science, vol. 5 (Wolfram Media Champaign, 2002).

25. Smith, E. Thermodynamics of natural selection i: Energy ﬂow and the limits on organization. Journal of theoretical

biology 252, 185–197 (2008).

27/37

26. Pavlic, T. P., Adams, A. M., Davies, P. C. & Walker, S. I. Self-referencing cellular automata: A model of the evolution
of information control in biological systems. Proc. of the Fourteenth International Conference on the Synthesis and
Simulation of Living Systems (ALIFE 14) (2014).

27. Tisseur, P. Cellular automata and lyapunov exponents. Nonlinearity 13, 1547 (2000).

28. Ellis, G. F. Top-down causation and emergence: some comments on mechanisms. Interface Focus rsfs20110062 (2011).

29. Walker, S. I., Cisneros, L. & Davies, P. C. Evolutionary transitions and top-down causation. Proceedings of Artiﬁcial Life

30. Levary, D., Eckmann, J.-P., Moses, E. & Tlusty, T. Loops and self-reference in the construction of dictionaries. Physical

31. Kataoka, N. & Kaneko, K. Functional dynamics. i: Articulation process. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 138, 225–250

XIII 283–290 (2012).

Review X 2, 031018 (2012).

(2000).

32. Taylor, T. Redrawing the boundary between organism and environment. Proceedings of Artiﬁcial Life IX 268–273 (2004).

33. Laubichler, M. D. & Renn, J. Extended evolution: A conceptual framework for integrating regulatory networks and niche
construction. Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular and Developmental Evolution 324, 565–577 (2015).

Acknowledgements

This project was made possible through support of a grant from the Templeton World Charity Foundation. The opinions
expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of Templeton World Charity
Foundation. We thank S. Wolfram, T. Rowland, T. Beynon, A. Rueda-Toicen, and C. Marletto, and the Emergence group at
ASU for helpful discussions related to this work.

Author contributions

A.A., H.Z. and S.I.W. designed the research; A.A. and S.I.W. performed research; A.A., H.Z., P.D. and S.I.W. analyzed
data; A.A., H.Z., P.D. and S.I.W. wrote the paper. All data and related code has been made publically available at https:
//github.com/alyssa-adams/OEE_Project.

Competing ﬁnancial interests

The author(s) declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.

28/37

Figure 11. Frequency distributions of recurrence times tr for Case I CA with we = wo (leftmost column), we = 3
middle), we = 2wo (right middle) and we = 5
respectively. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of an isolated ECA of width wo is highlighted by the black vertical line in each
panel.

2 wo (rightmost column). For rows from top to bottom, wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7

2 wo (left

29/37

Figure 12. Frequency distributions of recurrence times tr for Case II CA. From top to bottom, wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7
respectively. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of an isolated ECA of width wo is highlighted by the black vertical line in each
panel.

30/37

Figure 13. Frequency distributions of tr for Case III CA with µ = 0.01 (left), µ = 0.1 (middle) and µ = 0.5 (right). From top
to bottom, wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 respectively. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of an isolated ECA of width wo is highlighted by
the black vertical line in each panel.

31/37

Figure 14. Rank ordered frequency distributions of rules (“metagenomes”) implemented by o in its attractor. From top to
bottom we = 1
2 wo, respectively. Highlighted in blue are the frequencies of Class I and II rules (left),
Class III rules (middle) and Class IV rules (right).

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

32/37

Figure 15. Rank ordered frequency distributions of rules (“metagenomes”) implemented by o in its attractor for OEE cases
only. From top to bottom we = 1
2 wo, respectively. Highlighted in blue are the frequencies of Class I and
II rules (left), Class III rules (middle) and Class IV rules (right).

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

Figure 16. Distribution of attractor sizes ta for the state trajectory of for all 88 non-equivalent ECA rules, evolved from all
possible initial conditions of width wo. Attractor sizes are normalized to the Poincar´e time tP = 2wo for an isolated ECA, where
the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale).

33/37

Figure 17. Distribution of attractor sizes ta for the state trajectory of o, for Case II CA. Attractor sizes are normalized to the
Poincar´e time tP = 2wo for an isolated ECA. The black horizontal line indicates where ta/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale).
Sample trajectories displaying unbounded evolution (UE) occur for ta/tP > 1.

34/37

Figure 18. Distribution of attractor sizes ta for the state trajectory of o for Case I CA. Shown from top to bottom are
distributions for we = 1
for an isolated ECA. The black horizontal line indicates where ta/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale). Sampled trajectories
displaying UE occur for tr/tP > 1.

2 wo, respectively. Attractor sizes are normalized to the Poincar´e time tP = 2wo

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

35/37

Figure 19. Heat maps of compression C (left) and Lyapunov exponent values k (right) for sampled OEE trajectories for the
states of o for Case I CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, with distributions shown for we = 1
2 wo, 2wo and
5
2 wo (from top to bottom, respectively) for each wo. Distributions are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for
each wo and we (see statistics in Table 5).

2 wo, wo, 3

Figure 20. Heat maps of compression C for all sampled trajectories of the states of o (left), and for OEE trajectories only
(right) shown for Case I and Case II CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. For each wo shown are the distributions of C
for Case I CA for we = wo (top row in each panel) and for Case II CA with we = 8 (bottom row in each panel). Distributions
are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for each wo and we for each CA variant (see statistics in Tables 5 and 6).

36/37

Figure 21. Heat maps of Lyapunov exponent k for all sampled trajectories of the states of o (left), and for OEE trajectories
only (right) shown for Case I and Case II CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. For each wo shown are the distributions
of k for Case I CA for we = wo (top row in each panel) and for Case II CA with we = 8 (bottom row in each panel).
Distributions are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for each wo and we for each CA variant (see statistics in
Tables 5 and 6).

Figure 22. Example executions of the state trajectory of o for Case I CA for large system size wo = 101, with we = wo.

37/37

6
1
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
1
 
 
]
E
N
.
s
c
[
 
 
2
v
0
5
7
1
0
.
7
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Formal Deﬁnitions of Unbounded Evolution and
Innovation Reveal Universal Mechanisms for
Open-Ended Evolution in Dynamical Systems

Alyssa Adams1,2,3, Hector Zenil3,4,5, Paul C.W. Davies1, and Sara Imari Walker1,6,7,8,*

1Beyond Center for Fundamental Concepts in Science, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
2Department of Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
3Algorithmic Nature Group, LABORES, Paris, France
4Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford UK
5Unit of Computational Medicine, SciLifeLab, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm
Sweden
6School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
7ASU-SFI Center for Biosocial Complex Systems, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ USA
8Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Seattle WA USA
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: sara.i.walker@asu.edu

ABSTRACT

Open-ended evolution (OEE) is relevant to a variety of biological, artiﬁcial and technological systems, but has been challenging
to reproduce in silico. Most theoretical efforts focus on key aspects of open-ended evolution as it appears in biology. We recast
the problem as a more general one in dynamical systems theory, providing simple criteria for open-ended evolution based on
two hallmark features: unbounded evolution and innovation. We deﬁne unbounded evolution as patterns that are non-repeating
within the expected Poincar ´e recurrence time of an equivalent isolated system, and innovation as trajectories not observed
in isolated systems. As a case study, we implement novel variants of cellular automata (CA) in which the update rules are
allowed to vary with time in three alternative ways. Each is capable of generating conditions for open-ended evolution, but vary
in their ability to do so. We ﬁnd that state-dependent dynamics, widely regarded as a hallmark of life, statistically out-performs
other candidate mechanisms, and is the only mechanism to produce open-ended evolution in a scalable manner, essential to
the notion of ongoing evolution. This analysis suggests a new framework for unifying mechanisms for generating OEE with
features distinctive to life and its artifacts, with broad applicability to biological and artiﬁcial systems.

Introduction

Many real-world biological and technological systems display rich dynamics, often leading to increasing complexity over time
that is limited only by resource availability. A prominent example is the evolution of biological complexity: the history of life on
Earth has displayed a trend of continual evolutionary adaptation and innovation, giving rise to an apparent open-ended increase
in the complexity of the biosphere over its > 3.5 billion year history1. Other complex systems, from the growth of cities2, to
the evolution of language3, culture4, 5 and the Internet6 appear to exhibit similar trends of innovation and open-ended dynamics.
Producing computational models that generate sustained patterns of innovation over time is therefore an important goal in
modeling complex systems as a necessary step on the path to elucidating the fundamental mechanisms driving open-ended
dynamics in both natural and artiﬁcial systems. If successful, such models hold promise for new insights in diverse ﬁelds
ranging from biological evolution to artiﬁcial life and artiﬁcial intelligence.

Despite the signiﬁcance of realizing open-ended evolution in theoretical models, progress in this direction has been hindered
by lack of a universally accepted deﬁnition for open-ended evolution (OEE). Although relevant to many ﬁelds, OEE is most
often discussed in the context of artiﬁcial life, where the problem is so fundamental that it has been dubbed a “millennium
prize problem”7. Many working deﬁnitions exist, which can be classiﬁed into four hallmark categories as outlined by Banzhaf
et al.8: (1) on-going innovation and generation of novelty9, 10; (2) unbounded evolution1, 11, 12; (3) on-going production of
complexity13–15; (4) a deﬁning feature of life16. Each of these faces its own challenges, as each is cast in terms of equally
ambiguous concepts. For example, the concepts of “innovation” or “novelty”, “complexity” and “life” are all notoriously
difﬁcult to formalize in their own right. It is also not apparent whether “unbounded evolution” is physically possible since
real systems are limited in their dynamics by ﬁnite resources, ﬁnite time, and ﬁnite space. A further challenge is identifying
whether the diverse concepts of OEE are driving at qualitatively different phenomena, or whether they might be uniﬁed within a

common conceptual framework. For example, it has been suggested that increasing complexity might not itself be a hallmark
of OEE, but instead a consequence of it9, 16. Likewise, processes may appear unbounded, even within a ﬁnite space, if they can
continually produce novelty within observable dynamical timescales17.

Given these limitations, it was unclear if OEE is a property unique to life, is inclusive of its artifacts (such as technology),
or if it is an even broader phenomenon that could be a universal property of certain classes of dynamical systems. Many
approaches aimed at addressing the hallmarks of OEE have been inspired by biology17, primarily because biological evolution
is the best known example of a real-world system with the potential to be truly open-ended1. However, as stated, other examples
of potentially open-ended complex systems do exist, such as trends associated with cultural4, 5 and technological2, 6 growth, and
other creative processes. Therefore, herein we set out to develop a more general framework to seek links between the four
aforementioned hallmarks of OEE within dynamical systems, while remaining agnostic about their precise implementation in
biology. Our motivation is to discover universal mechanisms that underlie OEE as it might occur both within and outside of
biological evolution.

In dynamical systems theory there exists a natural bound on the complexity that can be generated by a ﬁnite deterministic
process, which is given by the Poincar´e recurrence time. Roughly, the Poincar´e time is the maximal time after which any
ﬁnite system returns to its initial state and its dynamical trajectory repeats. Clearly, new dynamical patterns cannot occur past
the Poincar´e time if the system is isolated from external perturbations. To cast the concept of unbounded evolution ﬁrmly
within dynamical systems theory, we introduce a formal minimal criteria for unbounded evolution (where we stress that here
we mean the broader concept of dynamical evolution, not just evolution in the biological sense) in ﬁnite dynamical systems:
minimally, an unbounded system is one that does not repeat within the expected Poincar´e time. A key feature is that this
deﬁnition automatically excludes ﬁnite deterministic systems unless they are open to external perturbations in some way. That
is, we contend that unbounded evolution (and in turn OEE which depends on it) is only possible for subsystem interacting
with an external environment. To make better contact with real-world systems, where the Poincar´e time often cannot even in
principle be observed, we introduce a second criteria of innovation. Systems satisfying the minimal deﬁnition of unbounded
evolution must also satisfy a formal notion of innovation, where we deﬁne innovation as dynamical trajectories not observed in
isolated, unperturbed systems. We identify innovation by comparison to counterfactual histories (those of isolated systems).
Like unbounded evolution, innovation is extrinsically deﬁned and requires interaction between at least two subsystems. A given
subsystem can exhibit OEE if only if it is both unbounded and innovative. As we will show, utilizing this criteria for OEE
allows us to evaluate candidate mechanisms for generating OEE in simple toy model dynamical systems, ones that could carry
over to more realistic complex dynamical systems.

The utility of these deﬁnitions is that they provide a simple way to quantify intuition regarding hallmarks (1) and (2) of
OEE for systems of ﬁnite size, which is applicable to any comparable dynamical system. They therefore provide a means
to quantitatively evaluate, and therefore directly compare, different potential mechanisms for generating OEE. We apply
these deﬁnitions to test three new variants of cellular automata (CA) for their capacity to generate OEE. A key feature of the
new variants introduced is their implementation of time-dependent update rules, which represents a radical departure from
more traditional approaches to dynamical systems where the dynamical laws remain ﬁxed. Each variant introduced differs
in its relative openness to an external environment. Of the variants tested, our results indicate that systems that implement
time-dependent rules that are a function of their state are statistically better at satisfying the two criteria for OEE than dynamical
systems with externally driven time-dependence for their rules (that is where the rule evolution is not dependent on the state of
the subsystem of interest). We show that the state-dependent systems provide a mechanism for generating OEE that includes
the capacity for on-going production of novelty by coupling to larger environments. This mechanism is also scales with system
size, meaning the amount of open-endedness that is generated does not drop off as the system size increases. We then explore
the complexity of state-dependent systems in more depth, calculating general complexity measures including compressibility
(based on LZW in18) and Lyapunov exponents. Given that state-dependent dynamics are often cited as a hallmark feature of
life due to the role of self-reference in biological processes19–22, our results provide a new connection between hallmarks (1),
(2) and (4) of OEE. Our results therefore connect several hallmarks of OEE in a new framework that allows identiﬁcation of
mechanisms that might operate in a diverse range of dynamical systems. The framework holds promise for providing insights
into universal mechanisms for generating OEE in dynamical systems, which is applicable to both biological and artiﬁcial
systems.

Theory

Traditionally dynamical systems, like their physical counterparts, are modeled with ﬁxed dynamical laws – a legacy from the
time of Newton. However, this framework may not be the appropriate one for modeling biological complexity, where the
dynamical laws appear to be self-referential and evolve in time as a function of the states19–22. An explicit example is the
feedback between genotype and phenotype within a cell: genes are “read-out” to produce changes to the state of expressed
proteins and RNAs, and these in turn can feedback to turn individual genes on and off23. Given this connection to biology, we

2/37

are motivated in this work to focus explicitly on time-dependent rules, where time-dependence is introduced by driving the rule
evolution through coupling to an external environment. Since open-ended evolution has been challenging to characterize in
traditional models with ﬁxed dynamical rules, implementing time-dependent rules could open new pathways to generating
complexity. In this study we therefore deﬁne open systems as those where the rule dynamically evolves as a function of time,
and we assume this is driven by interaction with an environment. As we show, time-dependent rules allow novel trajectories to
be realized that have not been previously characterized in cellular automata models. To quantify this novelty, we introduce a
rigorous notion of OEE that relies on formalized deﬁnitions of unbounded evolution and innovation. The deﬁnitions presented
rely on utilizing isolated systems evolved according to a ﬁxed rule as a set of counterfactual systems to compare to the novel
dynamics driven by time-dependent rules.

Formalizing Open-Ended Evolution as Unbounded Evolution and Innovation
A hallmark feature of open-ended evolutionary systems is that they appear unbounded in their dynamical evolution1, 11, 12. For
ﬁnite systems, such as those we encounter in the real world, the concept of “unbounded” is not well-deﬁned. In part this is
because all ﬁnite systems will eventually repeat, as captured by the well-known Poincar´e recurrence theorem. As stated in the
theorem, ﬁnite systems are bounded by their Poincar´e recurrence time, which is the maximal time after which a system will
start repeating its prior evolution. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of a ﬁnite, closed deterministic dynamical system therefore
provides a natural bound on when one should expect such a system to stop producing novelty. In other words, tp is an absolute
upper-bound on when such a system will terminate any appearance of open-endedness.

Potentially the Poincar´e recurrence theorem can locally be violated by a subsystem with open boundary conditions or if the
subsystem is stochastic (although in the latter case the system might still be expected to approximately repeat). We therefore
consider a deﬁnition of unbounded evolution applicable to any instance of a dynamical system that can be decomposed into
two interacting subsystems. Nominally, we refer to these two interacting subsystems as the “organism” (o) and “environment”
(e). We note that our framework is sufﬁciently general to apply to systems outside of biology: the concept of “organism” is
meant only to stress that we expect this subsystem to potentially exhibit the rich dynamics intuitively anticipated of OEE when
coupled to an environment (the environment, by contrast, is not expected to produce OEE behavior). The purpose of the second
“environment” subsystem is to explicitly introduce external perturbations to the organism, where e is also part of the larger
system under investigation and modulates the rule of o in a time-dependent manner. We therefore minimally deﬁne unbounded
evolution (UE) as occurring when a sub-partition of a dynamical system does not repeat within its expected Poincar´e recurrence
time, giving the appearance of unbounded dynamics for given ﬁnite resources:

Deﬁnition 1 Unbounded evolution (UE): A system U that can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e,
exhibits unbounded evolution if there exists a recurrence time such that the state-trajectory or the rule-trajectory of o is
non-repeating for tr > tP or t(cid:48)
r the recurrence time of the rules,
and tP is the Poincar´e recurrence time for an equivalent isolated (non-perturbed) system o.

r > tP respectively, where tr is the recurrence time of the states, t(cid:48)

Since we consider o where the states and rules evolve in time, unbounded evolution can apply to the state or rule trajectory
recurrence time and still satisfy Deﬁnition 1. That is, a dynamical system exhibits UE if and only if it can be partitioned such
that the sequence of one of its subsystems’ states or dynamical rules are non-repeating within the expected Poincar´e recurrence
time tP of an equivalent isolated system. In other words, unbounded evolution is only possible in a system that is partitioned
into at least two interacting subsystems. This way, one of the subsystems acts as an external driver for the rule evolution of the
other subsystem, which can then be pushed past its expected maximal recurrence time, tP. We calculate the expected tP as
that of an equivalent isolated system. By equivalent isolated system, we mean the set of all possible trajectories evolved from
any initial state drawn from the same set possible of states as for o, but generated with a ﬁxed rule, which can be any possible
ﬁxed rule. We will describe explicit examples using the Elementary Cellular Automata (ECA) rule space in Section Model
Implementation, where the relevant set of states are those constructed from the binary alphabet {0, 1} and the set of rules for
comparison are the ECA rules. ECA are deﬁned as 1-dimensional CA with nearest-neighbor update rules: for an ECA of width
w (number of cells across), equivalent isolated systems as deﬁned here include all trajectories evolved with any ﬁxed ECA rule
from any initial state of width w, where tP is then tP = 2w and w = wo, where wo is the width of o.

Implementing the above deﬁnition of UE necessarily depends on counterfactual histories of isolated systems (e.g. of ECA
in our examples). These counterfactual systems cannot, by deﬁnition, generate conditions for UE. This suggests as a corollary a
natural deﬁnition for innovation in terms of comparison to the same set of counterfactual histories:

Deﬁnition 2 Innovation (INN): A system U that can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e exhibits
innovation if there exists a recurrence time tr such that the state-trajectory is not contained in the set of all possible state
trajectories for an equivalent isolated (non-perturbed) system.

3/37

Figure 1. State diagrams: A hypothetical example demonstrating the concepts of INN and UE. The possible set of states are
S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and rules R = {α, β }. For each panel, the example state trajectory s is initialized with starting state so = 3.
For panels c and d the rule trajectory r is also shown. Highlighted in bold is the ﬁrst iteration of the attractor for states (all
panels) or rules (panel c and d only). For a discrete deterministic system of six states, the Poincar´e recurrence time is tP = 6.
Panel (a) shows the state transition diagram for hypothetical rule α where a trajectory initialized at s(t0) = 3 visits two states.
Panel (b) shows the state transition diagram for hypothetical rule β where a trajectory initialized at s(t0) = 3 visits only one
state. Since the trajectories in (a) and (b) evolve according to a ﬁxed rule (are isolated) they do not display INN or UE and in
general the recurrence time tr (cid:28) tP. Panel (c) demonstrates INN, where the trajectory shown cannot be fully described by rule
α or rule β alone. The state trajectory s and rule trajectory r both have a recurrence time of tr = 5, which is less than tP so this
example does not exhibit UE. Panel (d) exhibits UE (and is also an example of INN). The trajectory shown cannot be described
by rule α or rule β alone. The recurrence time for the state trajectory is tr = 13, which is greater than tP. The rule trajectory
also satisﬁes the conditions for UE, with a recurrence time in this example that is longer than that of the state trajectory due to
the fact that the state transition 2 → 5 could be driven by rule α or β depending on the coupling to an external system.

4/37

That is, a subsystem o exhibits INN by Deﬁnition 2 if its dynamics are not contained within the set of all possible trajectories
of equivalent isolated systems. We note these deﬁnitions do not necessitate that the complexity of individual states increase with
time, thus one might observe INN without a corresponding rise in complexity with time. Fig. 1 shows a conceptual illustration
of both UE and INN, as presented in Deﬁnitions 1 and 2.

A motivation for including both Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 is that they encompass intuitive notions of “on-going production of
novelty” (INN) and “unbounded evolution” (UE), both of which are considered important hallmarks of OEE8. UE can imply
INN, but INN does not likewise imply UE. It might therefore appear that UE is sufﬁcient to characterize OEE without needing
to appeal to separately deﬁning INN. The utility of including INN in our formalism is that it allows generalization to both
inﬁnite systems where UE is not deﬁned, and to real-world systems where UE is not physically observable (since, for example,
tP could in principle be longer than the age of the universe). For the latter, INN can be an approximation to UE, where higher
values of INN indicate a system more likely to exhibit UE (see Fig. 7). Additionally, the combination of UE and INN can be
used to exclude cases that appear unbounded but are only trivially so. For example, a partition of a system evolved according
to a ﬁxed dynamical rule could in principle locally satisfy UE, but would not satisfy INN since its dynamics could be shown
to be equivalent to those generated from an appropriately constructed isolated system (e.g. a larger ECA in our example).
An example is the time evolution of ECA Rule 3024, which is known to be a ‘complex’ ECA rule that continually generates
novel patterns under open-boundary conditions. In cases such as this, it should be considered that it is the complexity at the
open boundary of the system that is generating continual novelty and not a mechanism internal to the system itself. In other
words, in such examples the complexity is generated by the boundary conditions. Since our biosphere has simple, relatively
homogeneous boundary conditions (geochemical and radiative energy sources) the complexity of the biosphere likely arises
due to internal mechanisms and is not trivially generated by the boundary conditions alone25. Since we aim to understand
the intrinsic mechanisms that might drive OEE in real, ﬁnite dynamical systems, we therefore require both deﬁnitions to be
satisﬁed for a dynamical system to exhibit non-trivial OEE.

Model implementation
We evaluate different mechanisms for generating OEE against Deﬁnitions 1 and 2, utilizing the rule space of Elementary
Cellular Automata (ECA) as a case study. ECA are deﬁned as nearest-neighbor 1-dimensional CA operating on the two-bit
alphabet {0, 1}. There are 256 possible ECA rules, and since the rule numbering is arbitrary, we label them according to
Wolfram’s heuristic designation24. Due to their relative simplicity, ECA represent some of the most widely-studied CA, thus
providing a well-characterized foundation for this study. Traditionally, ECA evolve according to a ﬁxed dynamical rule starting
from a speciﬁed initial state. As such, no isolated ﬁnite ECA can meet both of the criteria laid out in Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 as per
our construction aimed at excluding trivial cases. An isolated ECA of width w will repeat its pattern of states by the Poincar´e
time tP = 2w (violating Deﬁnition 1). If we instead considered a CA of width w as a subsystem of a larger ECA it would not
necessarily repeat within 2w time steps, but it would not be innovative (violating Deﬁnition 2). Thus, as stated, we can exclude
trivial examples such as ECA Rule 30, or other unbounded but non-innovative dynamical processes, which repeatedly apply the
same update rule. A list of model parameters are summarized in Table 1.

To exclude trivial unbounded cases, Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 are constructed to require that the dynamical rules themselves
evolve in time. As we will show, utilizing the set of 256 possible ECA rules as the rule space for CA with time-dependent rules
makes both UE and INN possible. Rules can be stochastically or deterministically evolved, and we explore both mechanisms
here. We note that there exists a huge number of possible variants one might consider. We therefore focus on three variants that
display important mechanisms implicated in generating OEE, including openness to an environment10 (of varying degrees in all
three variants), state-dependent dynamics (regarded as a hallmark feature of life19, 21, 22), and stochasticity. Here openness to an
environment is parameterized by the degree to which the rule evolution of o depends on the state (or rule) of o, as compared to
its dependence on the state of e. Completely open systems are regarded as depending only on external factors, such that the
time-dependence of the rule evolution is only a function of the environment. We also consider cases that are only partially open,
where the rule evolution depends on both extrinsic and intrinsic factors.

Case I
The ﬁrst variant, Case I, implements state-dependent update rules, such that the evolution of o depends on its own state and that
of its environment. This is intended to provide a model that captures the hypothesized self-referential dynamics underlying
biological systems (see e.g. Goldenfeld and Woese21) while also being open to an environment (we do not consider closed
self-referential systems herein as treated in Pavlic et al since these do not permit the possibility of UE26). We consider two
coupled subsystems o and e, where the update rule of o is state-dependent and is a function the state and rule of o, and the
state of e at the same time t (thus being self-referential but also open to perturbations from an external system). That is, the
update rule of o takes on the functional form ro(t + 1) = f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)), where so and ro are the state and rule of the
organism respectively, and se is the state of the environment. We regard this case as only partly open to an environment since
the evolution of the rule of o depends on its own state (and rule) in addition to the state of its environment. By contrast, the

5/37

Table 1. Table of terms and model parameters.

Parameter Deﬁnition

o
e
so
ro
se
wo
we
tP
tr
t(cid:48)
r
I
µ
ξ
C
k

Single organism execution
Single environment execution
state of o
rule of o
state of e
width of o
width of e
Poincar´e recurrence time
Recurrence time of so
Recurrence time of ro
Innovation calculated as the normalized number of rule transitions
Mutation threshold of Case III variant µ = [0, 1)
random noise for Case III variant, ξ = [0, 1)
Compressibility
Lyapunov exponent

subsystem e is closed to external perturbation and evolves according to a ﬁxed rule (such that e is an ECA ). Both o and e
have periodic boundary conditions (o is only open in the sense that its rule evolution is in part externally driven). A schematic
illustration of the time evolution of an ECA, and the coupling between subsystems in a Case I CA is shown in Figure 2.

To demonstrate how the organism in our example of a Case I CA changes its update rule, we provide a simple illustrative
example of the particular function f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)) implemented in this work (see 3 and Supplement 1.1). Speciﬁcally, we
utilize an update function that takes advantage of the binary representation of ECA. An example of the structure of an ECA rule
is shown for Rule 30 in Fig. 2. ECA rules are structured such that each successive bit in the binary representation of the rule is
the output of one of the 23 possible ordered sets of triplet states. The left panel of Fig. 3 shows an example of a few times
steps of the evolution of an organism o of width wo = 4 (right) coupled to an environment e with width we = 6 (left), where o
implemented rule 30 at t − 1. At each time-step t the frequency of each of the 23 ordered triplet states (listed in the top row of
Fig. 2) in the state of o is compared to the frequency of the same ordered triplet in the state of e. If the frequency in o meets or
exceeds the frequency in e for a given triplet, the bit corresponding to the output of that triplet in the rule of o is ﬂipped from
0 ↔ 1. For the example in the left panel of Fig. 3, the triplet frequencies are listed in the table in the right panel of Fig. 3. We
note that for our implementation, the frequency of a triplet in o is calculated relative to the total number of possible triplets in
so, which is 4 in this example (and likewise for e, with 6 possible triplets in the current state). We compare the frequency only
for those triplets that appear in the state of o at time t. In the table, only the triplet 101 is expressed more frequently in the
organism o than in the environment e. The interaction between o and e changes ro from Rule 30 at time-step t to Rule 62 at
t + 1, as shown in Fig. 3. The rule may change by more than one bit in its binary representation in a single time step if multiple
triplets meet the criteria to change the organism’s update rule.

We note that we do not expect the qualitative features of Case I CA reported here to depend on the precise form of the
state-dependent update rule as presented, so long as the update of ro depends on the state and rule of o, and the state of e (that
is, o is self-referential and open – see Pavlic et al.26 for an example of non-open self-referencing CA that does not display UE).
We explored some variants to this rule-changing mechanism. None of our variants signiﬁcantly changed the statistics of the
results, indicating that the qualitative features of the dynamics do not depend on the exact (and somewhat parochial) details
of the example presented herein. Instead, we regard the important part to be the general feature of self-reference coupled to
openness to an environment that is driving the interesting features of the dynamics observed, where we can focus on just one
example in this study for computational tractability in generating large ensemble statistics. The example implemented here was
chosen since it takes explicit advantage of the structure of ECA rules (by ﬂipping bits in the rule table) to provide a simple,
open state-dependent mechanism for producing interesting dynamics.

Case II
We introduce a second variant of CA, Case II, that is similarly composed of two spatially segregated, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional
CA: an organism o and an environment e. As with Case I, the environment e is an execution of an ECA, and is evolved
according to a ﬁxed rule drawn from the set of 256 possible ECA rules. The key difference between Case I and Case II CA is

6/37

Figure 2. Illustrations of the time evolution of a standard ECA (left) and of a Case I state-dependent CA (right). ECA evolve
according to a ﬁxed update rule (here Rule 30), with the same rule implemented at each time step. In an ECA rule table, the cell
representation of all possible binary ordered triplets is shown in the top row, with the cell representation of the corresponding
mapping arising from Rule 30 shown below. Rule 30 therefore has the binary representation 00011110. In a Case I CA (right),
the environment subsystem e evolves exactly like an ECA with a ﬁxed rule. The organism subsystem o, by contrast, updates its
rule at each time-step depending on its rule at the previous time-step, its own state (green arrows) and the state of e (red arrows).
The new rule for o is then implemented to update the state of o (blue arrows). The rules are therefore time-dependent in a
manner that is a function of the states of o and e and the past history of o (through the dependence on the rule at the previous
time-step).

7/37

Figure 3. Example of the implementation of a Case I organism in our example. Shown is an organism o of width wo = 4,
coupled to an environment e with width we = 6, where the rule of o at time step t is ro(t) = 30. (a) At each time step t, the
frequency of ordered triplets are compared in the state of the organism and that of the environment, so and se respectively, and
used to update ro(t) → ro(t + 1) (see text for algorithm description). (b) Table of the calculated frequency of ordered triplets in
the state of the environment and in the state of the organism for time step t shown in the left panel. (c) Update of ro from Rule
30 to Rule 62, based on the frequency of triplets in the table (b).

8/37

that for Case II, the the update rule of the subsystem o depends only on the state of the external environment e and is therefore
independent of the current state or rule of o – that is, o is not self-referential in this example. Case II CA emulate systems
where the rules for dynamical evolution are modulated exclusively by the time evolution of an external system. We consider
o in this example to be more open to its environment than for Case I, since the rule evolution of o depends only on e. The
functional form of Case II rule evolution may be written as ro(t + 1) = f (se(t)), where ro is the rule of o and se is the state of
the environment (see Supplement 1.2). For the example presented here, we implement a map f that takes se(t) → ro(t) that is
1 : 1 from the state of e to the binary representation of the rule of o (determined according to Wolfram’s binary classiﬁcation
scheme). Therefore for the implementation of Case II in our example the environment must be of width we = 8.

Case III
The ﬁnal variant, Case III, is composed of a single, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional CA with periodic boundary conditions, which is
identiﬁed as the organism o. Like with Case II, the rule evolution of Case III is driven externally and does not depend on o.
However, here the external environment e is stochastic noise and not an ECA. The subsystem o has a time-dependent rule where
each bit in the rule table is ﬂipped with a probability µ (“mutation rate”) at each time step. In functional form, the subsystem o
updates its rule such that ro(t + 1) = f (ro(t), ξ ), where ro is the rule of o, and ξ is a random number drawn from the interval
[0, 1) (see Supplement 1.3). At each time step, for each bit in the rule table, a random number ξ is drawn, and if ξ is above a
threshold µ, that bit is ﬂipped 0 ↔ 1 at that time step. This implements a diffusive-random walk through ECA rule space. Since
the rule of o at time t + 1, ro(t + 1), depends on the rule at time t, ro(t), the dynamics of Case III CA are history-dependent in a
similar manner to Case I (both rely on ﬂipping bits in ro(t), where Case I do so deterministically as a function of so and se, and
Case III do so stochastically). In this example, o is also more open to its environment than in Case I since the organism’s rule
does not depend on so, but it is less open than Case II since the rule does depend on the previous organism rule used.

Table 2. Table of cellular automata variants, and the functional form of the rule evolution of o.

CA Variant
Case I
Case II
Case III
ECA (Isolated)

Environment, e
Organism Rule Evolution
ro(t + 1) = f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)) ECA, varied we
ro(t + 1) = f (se(t))
ro(t + 1) = f (ro(t), ξ )
ro(t + 1) = ro(t)

ECA, we = 8
Heat bath
None

All three variants are summarized in Table 2 (see Supplement 1), where the functional dependencies of the rule evolution in
each example are explicitly compared. Since we restrict the rule space for Cases I–III to that of ECA rules only, the trajectories
of ECA with periodic boundary conditions provides a well-deﬁned set of isolated counterfactual trajectories with which to
evaluate Deﬁnitions 1 and 2. For comparison to isolated systems, we evaluate all ECA of width wo, where wo is the width of
the “organism” subsystem o. We test the capacity for each of the three cases presented to generate OEE against Deﬁnitions 1
and 2 in a statistically rigorous manner, and compare the efﬁcacy of the different mechanisms implemented in each case.

Experimental Methods
For Cases I - III, we evolve o with periodic boundary conditions (such that interaction with the environment is only through
the rule evolution). For Cases I and II, e is also a CA with periodic boundary conditions. For Case I, where we must also be
speciﬁed, we consider systems with we = 1/2wo, wo, 3/2wo, 2wo and 5/2wo , where wo is the width o. For Case II, we = 8
for all simulations, since this permits a 1:1 map from the possible states of e to the rule space of ECA. Results for Case III
are given for organism rule mutation rate µ = 0.5, such that each outcome bit in the rule evolution has a 50% probability of
ﬂipping at every time step for ξ drawn from the interval [0, 1) (a bit ﬂips when µ > ξ ). Other values of µ were explored, with
qualitatively similar results (see Supplement Fig. S4).

The number of possible executions grows exponentially large with width wo, limiting the computational tractability of
statistically rigorous sampling. We therefore explored small CA with wo = 3, 4, . . . 7 and sampled a representative subspace of
each (see Supplement 2). For each system sampled, we measured the recurrence times of the rule (t(cid:48)
r) and state (tr) trajectories
for o. For Case III CA, which are stochastic, all simulations eventually terminated as a random oscillation between the all
‘0‘ state and the all ‘1‘ state. We therefore used the timescale of reaching this oscillatory attractor as a proxy for the state
recurrence time tr. In cases where tr > tP or t(cid:48)
o for isolated ECA (Deﬁnition 1), and the state trajectory was
not produced by any ECA execution of width wo (Deﬁnition 2), the system is considered to exhibit OEE.

r > tP, where tP = 2w

We measured the complexity of the resulting interactions by calculating relative compressibility, C, and by the system’s
sensitivity based upon Lyapunov exponents, k27 (see Supplement 8). Large values of C indicate low Kolmogorov-Chaitin
complexity, meaning the output can be produced by a simple (short) program. Large values of k indicate complex dynamics,
with trajectories that rapidly diverge for small perturbations such as occurs in deterministic chaos27. These values are compared

9/37

Table 3. Percentage of sampled cases displaying OEE (satisfying Deﬁnitions 1 and 2) for each CA variant. Rows are organism
width, wo, and columns correspond to the three different CA variants and ECA statistics.

wo ECA Case I (wo = we) Case II Case III
3
4
5
6
7

7.42
1.05
2.76
5.2 × 10−3
4.7 × 10−4

42.47
11.54
10.43
0.27
0.7

0.02
0.38
3.41
0.03
1.06

0
0
0
0
0

to those of ECA. Additionally, ECA rules are often categorized in terms of four Wolfram complexity classes, I - IV24. Class I
and II are considered simple because all initial patterns evolve quickly into a stable or oscillating, homogeneous state. Class
III and IV rules are viewed as generating more complex dynamics. We use the complexity classes of the rules utilized in
time-dependent rule evolution to determine whether the complexity of time-dependent CAs is a product of the ECA rules
implemented, or if it is generated through the mechanism of time-dependence.

Results

The vast majority of executions sampled from all three CA variants were innovative by Deﬁnition 2, with > 99% of Case II
and Case III CAs displaying INN. For Case I CA, the percentage of INN cases increased as a function of both wo and we,
ranging from ∼ 30% for the smallest CA explored to > 99% for larger systems (see Supplement 5). This is intuitive, since the
majority of organisms with changing updates rules should be expected to exhibit different state-trajectories than ECA. The
fact that > 99% of organisms are innovative in our examples may seem to indicate that INN is trivial. However, we note that
INN conceptually becomes more signiﬁcant when considering inﬁnite systems (where UE is not deﬁned) or large systems
where tP is not measurable (and thus UE cannot be calculated). We show below that INN scales with recurrence time, and the
amount of innovation is a good proxy for UE. INN is therefore useful to the analysis of large or inﬁnite systems where the
methods implemented here to detail candidate mechanisms are not directly applicable to test UE. INN is also necessary to
exclude trivial OEE. We also note that for computational tractability we compare the time evolution of o only to ECA, but in
practice one could (and perhaps should) compare o to dynamical systems evolved according to any ﬁxed rule (e.g. regardless of
neighborhood size, which for ECA is n = 3), in which case we might expect the number of INN cases to decrease and therefore
INN would be more non-trivial even for small systems.

By contrast to cases exhibiting INN, OEE cases are much rarer, even for our highly simpliﬁed examples, due to the fact that
the number of UE cases is much smaller, typically representing < 5% of all the sampled trajectories in the examples studied
here. We therefore focus discussion primarily on sampled executions meeting the criteria for OEE, i.e. those that satisﬁed
Deﬁnitions 1, before returning to how INN might approximate UE.

Open-Ended Evolution in CA variants.
The percentage of sampled cases for each CA variant that satisfy Deﬁnitions 1 for UE are shown in Table 3, where for purposes
of more direct comparison Case I CA statistics are shown only for wo = we. Case I CA statistics for other relative values of wo
and we are shown in Table 4. Box plots of the distribution of measured recurrence times for each CA variant are shown in Fig. 5
and Fig. 6. All UE cases presented here are also INN, and thus exhibit OEE. We therefore refer to UE and OEE interchangeably
(without explicitly referencing OEE as cases exhibiting UE and INN separately). Examples of Case I CA exhibiting OEE are
shown in Fig. 4, demonstrating the innovative patterns that can emerge due to time dependent rules.

To compare the capacity for OEE across the different CA variants tested, it is useful to deﬁne a notion of scalability17. Here
we deﬁne scalable systems as ones where the number of observed OEE cases can increase without the need to either (1) change
the rule-updating mechanism of o or (2) signiﬁcantly change the statistics of sampled cases. By this deﬁnition, the two primary
mechanisms for increasing the number of OEE cases in a scalable manner are by changing wo, or depending on the nature of
the coupling between o and e, changing we (with the constraint that the rule-updating mechanism cannot change).

As expected (by deﬁnition), isolated ECA do not exhibit any OEE cases and the majority of ECA have recurrence times
tr (cid:28) tp. However, all three CA variants with time-dependent rules do exhibit examples of OEE, but differ in the percentage
of sampled cases and their scalability. Case III exhibits the simplest dynamics, where trajectories follow a diffusive random
walk through rule space until the system converges on a random oscillation between the all- (cid:48)0(cid:48) and all-(cid:48)1(cid:48) states (where tr is
approximated by this convergence time). The frequency of state recurrence times tr of the organism decreases exponentially
(see Supplement Fig. S4), such that the o with the longest recurrence times are exponentially rare. Since so few examples were
found for organisms of size wo = 7, we also tested wo = 8 and found no examples of OEE. In general, the exponential decline

10/37

Figure 4. Examples of Case I CA exhibiting OEE. In each panel the environment e is shown on the left, and organism o on
the right. For each o, the Poincar´e recurrence time (tP) for an isolated system is highlighted in blue, and the recurrence time of
the states of o, tr, is highlighted in red.

Table 4. Percentage of sampled cases displaying OEE (satisfying Deﬁnitions 1 and 2) for Case I, with varying environment
size we.

wo
3
4
5
6
7

1
2 wo wo
0
0
0
0
0

0.02
0.38
3.41
0.03
1.06

3
2 wo
6.52
2.28
7.04
2.15
2.95

2wo
10.81
2.94
7.5
2.64
4.39

5
2 wo
28.14
9.65
8.64
5.82
5.34

observed is steeper for increasing wo. Observing more OEE cases therefore requires exponentially increasing the number of
sampled trajectories for increasing wo. The capacity for Case III CA to demonstrate OEE is therefore not scalable with system
size (violating condition 2) in our deﬁnition above). An additional limitation of Case III CA is that their the long-term dynamics
are relatively simple once the system settles into the oscillatory attractor, thus the majority of observations of Case III CA
would not yield interesting dynamics (e.g. if the observation time were much greater than the start time tobs (cid:29) to).

For Case II, we also observed a steep decline in the number of OEE cases observed for increasing wo (Table 3). This is
reﬂected by a steady decrease in the mean of the recurrence times for increasing wo, as shown in Fig. 6. We also tested a large
statistical sample of organisms of size wo ≥ 8 for Case II CA (not shown) and found no examples of OEE cases. This is not
wholly unexpected. For Case II with wo = 8, the environment and organism are the same size (we = wo). Therefore e and o
share the same Poincar´e time tP = 2wo. The subsystem e is a traditional ECA, therefore the majority of e will exhibit recurrence
times (cid:28) tP (see e.g. trend in Fig. 6). Since the rule of o is determined by a 1:1 map from the state of e, the rule recurrence time
of o will also be much less than the Poincar´e time, such that t(cid:48)
r (cid:28) tP. It is the rule evolution that drives novelty in the state
evolution, we therefore also see that the state recurrence time is similarly limited such that tr (cid:28) tP also holds. To get around
this limitation one could increase the size of the environment such that we > wo. However, since the rule for o is a 1:1 map
from the state of e, this would require changing the updating rule scheme for o. That is, the organism o would have to change
how it evolves in time as a function of its environment (violating 1) in our deﬁnition of scalability above. By our deﬁnition of
scalability, this is not a scalable mechanism for generating OEE since o must change the function for its updating rule and
therefore would represent a different o.

We can compare the statistics of sampled OEE cases for Case I where wo = we to those of Case II and Case III, as in Table
3. While Case II and Case III CA see a steep drop-off in the percentage of sampled cases exhibiting OEE with increasing
organism size wo, the Case I CA exhibit a ﬂatter trend. We determined whether this trend holds for varying we by also analyzing
statistics for Case I CA where we = 1
2 wo. The statistics of OEE cases sampled are shown in Table 4 and

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

11/37

box plots of the distribution of recurrence times are shown in Fig. 5. For each ﬁxed environment size explored (we, columns in
Table 4), we observe that the statistics do not decrease dramatically as the size of the organism increases (increasing wo). For
ﬁxed organism size (wo, rows in Table 4), we observe that the number of OEE cases increases with increasing environment size.
These trends are also reﬂected in the means of the distributions shown in Fig. 5. Case I represents a scalable mechanism for
OEE as o can be coupled to larger environments and will produce more OEE cases.

Case I and Case II can be contrasted to gain insights into scalability. The key difference between the two variants is that for
Case II the update rule of o is a 1:1 map with the state of e, whereas for Case I the map is self-referencing and is many:1. Case I
therefore uses a coarse-grained representation of the environment for updating the rule of o and because the dynamics are
self-referential, the same pattern in the environment can lead to different rule transitions in o, depending on the previous state
and rule of o. Thus, although both Case I and Case II exhibit trends of increasing OEE as we is increased relative to wo, the
degree to which the size of the environment can impact the time evolution of the organism is different for the two cases. For a
comparable size environment in Case I and Case II CA, the pattern relevant to the update of o may have a longer recurrence
time than the actual states of e for Case I CA (due to the coarse-graining), whereas for Case II CA this pattern is strictly limited
by the environment’s recurrence time. Additionally, due to the coarse-graining of the environment in Case I CA, the update
rule of o is not dependent on the size of e: the same exact function for updating the rule of o may be applied independent
of the environment size. This is not true for Case II, where the function for updating the rule of o must change in order to
accommodate larger environments.

INN as a proxy for UE
We have presented examples of small dynamical systems to perform rigorous statistical testing of INN and UE to evaluate
candidate mechanisms for generating OEE. An important question is how the results might apply to larger dynamical systems
that could depend on different mechanisms than those testable in simple, discrete systems. While an approximation of INN
is in principle measurable for large or inﬁnite dynamical systems, UE is not measurable or not well-deﬁned. We therefore
aimed to determine if INN can be utilized as a proxy for UE. To do so, we deﬁned a new parameter nr, which quantiﬁes the
number of times that an organism changed its update rule between two successive time steps in its dynamical evolution. We
normalized to determine the relative innovation of an organism I = nr
2w to generate a standardized measure for comparing
across example organisms in our study. Statistically representative results for Case I and Case II organisms are shown in
Fig. 7, where I is plotted against the organism’s state recurrence time (Case III results are not included since the recurrence
time is not well-deﬁned). For both Case I and Case II a clear trend is apparent where innovation is positively (and nearly
linearly) correlated with recurrence time. For a given recurrence time, OEE cases (highlighted in red) are the most innovative.
Comparing the two panels, it is evident that Case I CA exhibit higher innovation and therefore achieve longer recurrence times
than Case II CA. From these results we can conclude that a statistical measure sampling the number of observed rule transitions
could be used as a proxy for UE, which we leave as a subject for future work.

On-going Generation of Complexity in Case I
We also considered the complexity of Case I CA, relative to isolated ECA, as a further test of their scalability and potential to
generate complex and novel dynamics. We characterized the complexity of Case I using two standard complexity measures,
compressibility (C) and Lyapunov exponent (k). The trends demonstrate that in general C decreases with increasing organisms
width wo, but increases with increasing environment size we (left panel, Fig. 8), indicative of increasing complexity with
organism width wo. Similar trends are observed for the Lyapunov exponent, as shown in the right panel of Fig. 8, where it is
evident that increasing wo or we leads to an increasing number of cases with higher Lyapunov exponent k. OEE cases tend to
have the highest k values (see Supplement Fig. S12). As C is normalized relative to ECA (see Supplement 8), we conclude that
Case I CA are generally more complex than ECA evolved according to ﬁxed dynamical rules, and this is especially true for
OEE cases.

We also analyzed the ECA rules implemented in sampled Case I trajectories relative to the Wolfram Rule complexity
classes. We ﬁnd that Case I CA, on average, implement more Class I and II rules than Class III or IV, as shown in the frequency
distribution of Fig. 9 for Case I CA with wo = we (see Supplement Fig. 5 and 6). Thus, we can conclude that the complexity
generated by Case I CA is intrinsic to the state-dependent mechanism, and is not attributable to Class III and Class IV ECA
rules dominating the rule evolution of o.

Discussion

We have provided formal deﬁnitions of unbounded evolution (UE) and innovation (INN) that can be evaluated in any ﬁnite
dynamical system, provided it can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e. Systems satisfying both UE and
INN we expect to minimally represent mechanisms capable OEE. Testing the criteria for UE and INN against three different

12/37

Figure 5. Distribution of recurrence times tr for the state trajectory of o for Case I CA. From top to bottom are distributions
for we = 1wo, wo, 3wo, 2wo and 5wo, respectively. In all panels the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1 (shown on a
log scale). Sampled trajectories displaying UE occur for tr/tP > 1.

13/37

Figure 6. Distribution of recurrence times tr for the state trajectory of o for ECA (top left), Case II (top right), and Case III
CA (bottom). In all panels the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale). Sampled trajectories
displaying UE occur for tr/tP > 1.

14/37

Figure 7. Relative innovation as a function of recurrence times for Case I (left) and Case II (right) CA. Highlighted in red are
cases exhibiting OEE.

CA models with time-dependent rules reveals what we believe to be quite general mechanisms applicable to a broad class of
OEE systems.

Mechanisms for OEE
Our analysis indicates that there are potentially many time-dependent mechanisms that can produce OEE in a subsystem
o embedded within a larger dynamical system, but that some may be more interesting than others. An externally driven
time-dependence for the rules of o (Case II), while producing the highest statistics of OEE cases sampled for small o, does not
provide a scalable mechanism for producing OEE with increasing system size, unless the structure of o itself is fundamentally
altered (such that the rule space changes). Stochastically driven rule evolution displays rich transient dynamics, but ultimately
subsystems converge on dynamics with low complexity (Case III). An alternative is to introduce stochasticity to the states,
rather than the rules, which would avert this issue. This has the drawback that the mechanism for OEE is then not as clearly
mappable to biological processes (or other mechanisms internal to the system), where the genotype (rules) evolve due to random
mutations that then dictate the phenotype (states).

We regard Case I as the most interesting mechanism explored herein for generating conditions favoring OEE: it is scalable
and the dynamics generated are novel. We note that the state-dependent mechanism represents a departure from more traditional
approaches to modeling dynamical systems, e.g. as occurs in the physical sciences, where the dynamical rule is usually
assumed to be ﬁxed. In particular, it represents an explicit form of top-down causation, often regarded as a key mechanism
in emergence19, 28 that could also play an important role in driving major evolutionary transitions29. The state-dependent
mechanism is also consistent with an important hallmark of biology – that biological systems appear to implement self-
referential dynamics such that the “laws” in biology are a function of the states19, 21, 22, a feature that also appears to be
characteristic of the evolution of language30, 31.

Applicability to Other Dynamical Systems
We have independently explored openness to an environment, stochasticity and state-dependent dynamics as we expect these
to be general and apply to a wide-range of dynamical systems that might similarly display OEE by satisfying Deﬁnitions 1
and 2. An important feature of these deﬁnitions is that UE and INN must be driven by extrinsic factors (an environment)32,
although the mechanisms driving the dynamics characteristic of OEE should be intrinsic to the subsystem of interest. OEE can
therefore only be a property of a subsystem. We have not explored the case of feedback from o to e that might drive further
open-ended dynamics, as characteristic of the biosphere, for example in niche construction33, but expect even richer dynamics
to be observed in such cases. For large or inﬁnite dynamical systems INN is an effective proxy for UE, and we expect highly
innovative systems to be the most likely candidates for open-ended evolution.

15/37

Figure 8. Heat maps of compression C (left) and Lyapunov exponent values k (right) for all state trajectories of sampled o for
Case I CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, with distributions shown for we = 1
2 wo (from top
to bottom in each panel, respectively) for each wo. Distributions are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for each
wo and we (see statistics in Table S3).

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

Figure 9. Rank ordered frequency distributions of rules implemented in the attractor dynamics of o for all sampled Case I CA
(top) and OEE cases only (bottom). Highlighted are Wolfram Class III (light blue) and IV rules (dark blue).

16/37

Conclusions

Our results demonstrate that OEE, as formalized herein, is a general property of dynamical systems with time-dependent
rules. This represents a radical departure from more traditional approaches to dynamics where the “laws” remain ﬁxed. Our
results suggest that uncovering the principles governing open-ended evolution and innovation in biological and technological
systems may require removing the segregation of states and ﬁxed dynamic laws characteristic of the physical sciences for
the last 300 years. In particular, state-dependent dynamics have been shown to out-perform other candidate mechanisms in
terms of scalability, suggestive of paths forward for understanding OEE. Our analysis connects all four hallmarks of OEE and
provides a mechanism for producing OEE that is consistent with the self-referential nature of living systems. By casting the
formalism of OEE within the broader context of dynamical systems theory, the proof-of-principle approach presented opens up
the possibility of ﬁnding unifying principles of OEE that encompass both biological and artiﬁcial systems.

Supplementary Materials

Description of Implementations of Time-Dependent Cellular Automata Variants
We consider three new variants of cellular automata (CA) to identify mechanism(s) that can produce conditions necessary for
open-ended evolution (OEE) in bounded regions, subject to the formal criteria for OEE laid out in Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 in the
main text. We consider deﬁnitions of unbounded evolution (UE) and innovation (INN) that are applicable to any instance of
a dynamical system u that can be decomposed into two interacting subsystems o and e. Each CA variant implements time-
dependent rules for o, with different functional forms f for this time-dependence. Here we describe in detail the implementation
of each variant considered.

Case I: Deterministic State-Dependent Rules in Subsystem o
The ﬁrst variant, Case I, implements state-dependent update rules. Case I CA are composed of two spatially separate, ﬁxed-
width, 1-dimensional CA: an “organism” o and an environment e. Both o and e are implemented with periodic boundary
conditions, and utilize the alphabet {0, 1}. The environment e is an execution of an ECA, and is evolved according to a ﬁxed
rule drawn from the set of 256 possible ECA rules, with periodic boundary conditions.

The subsystem o updates its rule according to a function f such that ro(t + 1) = f (so(t), ro(t), se(t)), where so and ro are
the state and rule of the organism and se is the state of the environment. It is evolved with periodic boundary conditions. The
expressed ECA rule of o at time t, ro(t), is represented by the eight-bit binary representation of its rule table24, e.g. an o
implementing Rule 30 at time t will have ro(t) = [0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0] (see main text Fig. 3). We refer to individual bits within
the rule by the index i such that ro(t)[1] = 0, ro(t)[2] = 0, ro(t)[3] = 0, ro(t)[4] = 1 etc. for an o implementing Rule 30 at time
t. The binary representation of ECA rules are structured such that each successive bit i iterated in this manner represents the
output of application of the rule to the ordered set of triplet states S3 = [111, 110, 101, 100, 011, 010, 001, 000].

The function f for our example implementation of state-dependent CA is constructed such that at each time-step t it
compares the normalized frequency of each triplet i in S3 in the state of o and e, so(t) and se(t), respectively, and ﬂips the
corresponding bit i in ro(t) if i is expressed in so and the normalized frequency of the triplet in so(t) meets or exceeds the
normalized frequency in se(t) (where the frequency is normalized relative to the number of possible triplets in the state). That
is, at each time-step t, a bit i in ro(t) will ﬂip 0 ↔ 1 if ni(so(t)) ≥ ni(se(t)), where ni counts the relative frequency of triplet i.
Formally,

(cid:40)

ro(t + 1)[i] =

ro(t)[i]
ro(t)[i]

if ni(so(t)) ≥ ni(se(t))
if ni(so(t)) < ni(se(t))

where the overbar represents logical negation.

An example implementation of this update function is shown in Fig. 4 in the main text, where an “organism” o with wo = 4
is coupled to an environment e with we = 6, and ro(t) = [0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0]. In the example, only for i = 3, corresponding to
the triplet {1, 0, 1}, is n3(so(t)) ≥ n3(se(t)). Therefore, ro(t + 1)[3] = ro(t)[3] = ¯0 = 1, as shown schematically in Fig. 5 in the
main text. In this example, the interaction of o and e under f changes ro from Rule 30 at time-step t to Rule 62 at t + 1.

Case II: Deterministic Time-Dependent Rules in Subsystem o
The second variant, Case II, is similarly composed of two spatially separate, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional CA: an “organism”
o and an environment e. As with Case I, both o and e are implemented with periodic boundary conditions, and utilize the
alphabet {0, 1}. The environment e is an execution of an ECA, and is evolved according to a ﬁxed rule drawn from the set of
256 possible ECA rules, just as in Case I.

(1)

17/37

The key difference between Case I and Case II CA is that for Case II, the subsystem o updates its rule according to a
function f such that ro(t + 1) = f (se(t)). That is, for Case II the update rule of o depends only on the state of the external
environment se and is independent of the current state or rule of o (that is, o is not self-referential). Formally,

ro(t + 1)[i] = se(t)[i]

Here ro(t) is determined uniquely by se(t), such that the binary representation of each possible state of the environment uniquely
maps to one ECA rule according to Wolfram’s binary classiﬁcation scheme24. For this implementation the environment must be
of width we = 8 to mediate a bijective map between {se} and {ro}. Case II CA emulate systems where the rules for dynamical
evolution are modulated exclusively by the time evolution of an external system.

Case III: Stochastic Time-Dependent Rules in Subsystem o
The ﬁnal variant, Case III, is composed of a single, ﬁxed-width, 1-dimensional CA: the “organism” o. Like Case II, the rule
evolution of Case III is driven externally and does not depend on so. However, here the external environment e is stochastic noise
and not an ECA. In Case III CA, the subsystem o updates its rule according to a function f such that ro(t + 1) = f (ro(t), ξ ),
where ξ introduces random ﬂuctuations in the implemented rule of o by stochastically ﬂipping bits in ro. Formally,

ro(t + 1)[i] =

(cid:40)

ro(t)[i]
ro(t)[i]

if ξ < µ
if ξ ≥ µ

where µ is a ﬁxed threshold for ﬂipping between [0, 1), and ξ is a random number drawn from the interval [0, 1). This
implements a diffusive-random walk through ECA rule space. Since the rule of o at time t + 1, ro(t + 1), depends on the rule at
time t, ro(t), the dynamics of Case III CA are path-dependent in a similar manner to Case I (both rely on ﬂipping bits in ro(t),
where Case I do so deterministically as a function of so and se, and Case III do so stochastically).

Table 5. The size of the randomly sampled subspace for Case I CA for each wo and we explored.

#u

% Explored CA Variant wo

#u

% Explored

CA Variant wo
Case I:
we = 1

3

2 wo

Case I:
we = wo

Case I:
we = 3

2 wo

2.1×106

4.19×106
1.68×107
3.36×107
1.34×108

4.19×106

1.68×107
6.71×107
2.68×108
1.07×109

1.25

1.25
0.62
0.62
0.31

0.63

0.31
0.16
7.81×10−2
3.91×10−2

8.34×106

0.28

6.71×107
2.68×108
2.15×109
8.59×109

6.92×10−2
3.75×10−2
2.52×10−3
1.24×10−3

4
5
6
7

3

4
5
6
7

3

4
5
6
7

Case I:
we = 2wo

Case I:
we = 5

2 wo

3

4
5
6
7

3

4
5
6
7

3.36×107

6.92×10−2

2.68×108
2.15×109
1.72×1010
1.37×1011

1.73×10−2
4.69×10−3
3.16×10−4
7.75×10−5

6.71×107

3.91×10−2

1.074×109
8.59×108
1.37×1011
1.1×1012

4.88×10−2
1.22×10−3
1.53×10−4
3.81×10−5

Experimental Methods
The number of possible executions grows exponentially large with wo, limiting the computational tractability of statistically
rigorous sampling of the dynamics of each CA variant and of generating the set of counterfactual isolated ECA trajectories.
We therefore explored small CA with wo = 3, 4, . . . 7 and sampled a representative subset of all possible trajectories for each
wo (see Section for examples of larger CA). We then generated statistics on the number of sampled trajectories satisfying
Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 for unbounded evolution and innovation, respectively.

(2)

(3)

18/37

Case I Experiments
For Case I, we must be speciﬁed in addition to wo. We consider systems with we = 1
2 wo . For
comparison to Case II and Case III CA, we = wo statistics are used. For each wo and we, the initial state of o, so(0), the initial
state of e, se(0), the initial rule of o, ro(0) and the rule of e, re, are drawn at random. For r0(0) and re, we only consider the
88 non-equivalent ECA rules, which dramatically reduces the number of possible cases, but still covers the full spectrum of
complexity in initial conﬁgurations. We then permit ro to evolve into any of the 256 possible ECA rules. We also ensure that no
two cases sampled are initialized with the same tuple {so(0), se(0), ro(0), re}.

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

The space of all possible Case I CA executions is too large to explore the full space computationally. Since each e and o are

each initiated with a state and a rule, the number of possible executions is:

NU = N2

R × NSe × NSo = 882 × 28we × 28wo

(4)

where NR is the number of sampled initial rules for o and e, NSe is the number of sampled initial states for e, and NSo is the
number of sampled initial states for o. For wo = we = 3 and wo = we = 4, exploring the full space of all possible initial
conditions is computationally tractable, and veriﬁes that the statistics reported herein for executions of o that display UE and
INN are characteristic of the full computational space for the smaller sample sizes implemented in this study. The number of
randomly sampled cases for Case I CA included herein is given in Table 5.

Case II Experiments
For Case II, we = 8 for all simulations, since this permits a bijective map from {se} to the rule space of ECA and thus the set of
rules {ro}. As with Case I CA, executions are initialized with a randomized tuple {so(0), se(0), ro(0), re}, ensuring that no two
experiments are initialized with the same tuple. We restrict attention only to we = 8 for Case II experiments in this study to
directly compare to our Case I and Case III CA. The number of randomly sampled cases for Case II CA is given in Table 6.

Table 6. The size of the randomly sampled subspace for Case II CA for each wo explored.

Case III Experiments
For Case III, a threshold µ for stochastic ﬂipping of the bits in the rule table of o must be set. Results for Case III are given
for µ = 0.5 in the main paper, such that each outcome bit in the rule table at every time step ro(t) has a 50% probability of
ﬂipping. Results for other values are reported in Section . Since we evolve only the subsystem o for Case III CA, executions are
initialized with a random tuple {so(0), ro(0)}. We do not restrict sampled executions to unique tuples, since a different random
seed is set for each execution. The number of randomly sampled cases for Case III CA is given in Table 7.

Table 7. The size of the randomly sampled subspace for Case III CA for each wo explored.

CA Variant wo
Case II:
we = 8

3

#u

% Explored

1.34×108

2.31×10−2

2.68×108
5.37×108
1.07×109
2.15×109

2.1×10−2
2.1×10−2
2.1×10−2
1.98×10−2

CA Variant wo
Case III:
Random

3

#u

% Explored

5.24×105

10

1.05×106
2.1×106
4.19×106
8.39×106

5
5
5
5

4
5
6
7

4
5
6
7

Calculating Recurrence Time, Compressibility and Lyapunov Exponent
Recurrence times for the state- and rule-trajectory of o were calculated to identify cases exhibiting UE and thus OEE. The
complexity of the state trajectory {so(0), so(1), . . . so(tr)} was measured by means of its compressibility (C), and calculation of
the Lyapunov exponent (k).

19/37

r and tr for o, for both the rule evolution {ro(t1), ro(t2), ro(t3) . . . ro(t(cid:48)

r when the sequence of states or rules of o, respectively, repeated. In general, tr and t(cid:48)

Recurrence Time
For Cases I and II,we measured the recurrence times t(cid:48)
r)}
and the state evolution {so(t1), so(t2), so(t3) . . . so(tr)}, respectively. Recurrence times were calculated by determining the time
tr or t(cid:48)
r for o are not the same as for the full
system u (or as each other, such that often tr (cid:54)= t(cid:48)
r, see Fig. 1 in the main text). We therefore ﬁrst determined when u repeated
the tuple {so, se, ro} such that {so(t(cid:48)), se(t(cid:48)), ro(t(cid:48))} = {so(t), se(t), ro(t)}, where t < t(cid:48). We then determined the tr such that
{so(tr), so(tr + 1), . . . so(t(cid:48))} = {so(ti), so(ti + 1), . . . so(tr)} for ti < tr (and likewise for t(cid:48)
r with the replacement ro for so). The
time step ti is identiﬁed as initiation of the attractor dynamics for o. In many cases, we ﬁnd attractors that are unbounded and
innovative by Deﬁnitions 1 and 2, in addition to full trajectories up to recurrence. An example illustrating the expected Poincar´e
time for o, tP, its recurrence time for the state trajectory tr and the attractor size for the full system u, ta (up to the recurrence
time t(cid:48) for the full system) is shown in Fig. 10.

Figure 10. Relevant timescales for describing the dynamics of o embedded in u. Shown are the Poincar´e recurrence time tP
(blue) for an isolated ECA of the same width wo as o, the state-trajectory recurrence time tr of o (red), and attractor size of the
full system u, ta (green).

Since Case III CA are stochastically evolved, their dynamics do not repeat with a unique recurrence time tr for o. However,
all executions sampled eventually terminated in an oscillation between the two homogeneous states (all-‘0’s or all-‘1’s). These
states are attractors for every ﬁxed rule ECA evolved under periodic boundary conditions, so once a Case III CA evolves to
either homogeneous state, no heterogeneity will ever be produced (the dynamics behave somewhat like dissipation of the
heterogeneity in the initial state). We therefore consider it more meaningful to calculate the number of time steps before
convergence to this oscillatory attractor in place of the recurrence time tr, which we denote by tr for consistency of notation with
other cases explored. We therefore capture the timescale of relevance for all interesting (and potentially complex) dynamics,
which occur in the transient before converging to this attractor.

Compressibility
The Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity of string s is deﬁned as the size of the shortest computer program p running on a universal
Turing machine U that produces the string s (here s is the sequence of states of o):

Although it cannot be computed exactly, it is lower semi-computable and can be approximated by using a general lossless
compression algorithm L?. This upper-bound approximation of the Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity is normalized according to
a normalized compression measure C:

KU (s) = min{|p|,U(p) = s} .

C(s) =

L(s)
max(Ci(s), length(s))

.

Throughout this paper Ci is output of the Compress algorithm based on the LZW algorithm?. It can be replaced by the output
of any other compression algorithm. The measure is therefore a family of possible indexes approximating K. We use C as

(5)

(6)

20/37

measure over the state-trajectory of the organism o for each execution u, as an approximation of the characteristic complexity
of o in the limit of large times t → ∞.

Large values of C indicate low Kolmogorov-Chaitin complexity, meaning the output can be produced by a simple (short)
program p. The normalization constant max(C(s), length(s)) was calculated by measuring the number of bits resulting from
a generalized compression algorithm for the Poincar´e recurrence time of the entire system u, not an isolated organism. This
allows normalizing the observed C to its maximum possible value for an organism coupled to an environment. This closely
approximates an upper limit in C for the longest possible non-repeating trajectory for any given o.

In order to ensure the normalization constant for an organism of width wo is a close approximation to the maximal value,
Ci(s) was calculated for 107 randomly generated ECA of width wo, evolved with a ﬁxed rule for 22w time steps, where w is
the width of u, such that w = wo + we. The maximum of this set was used as the normalization constant max(Ci(s), length(s)).
Thus, all C values are normalized relative to the maximal complexity of a CA evolved according to a ﬁxed dynamical rule.

Lyapunov Exponent
The Lyapunov exponent k captures the speed at which a perturbation moves through a system27, thereby quantifying sensitivity
to initial conditions. In CA, k can be, in general, measured by perturbing a single bit in the initial condition, and counting how
many bits differ compared to the unperturbed time evolution in each time step:

y(t) = Hio[si(t), so(t)]

(7)

where Hio is the Hamming distance between the state of the perturbed system i and the original organism o, which is evaluated
at each time step t. The resulting time series of y(t) values can be approximated as an exponential function, y(t) = ekt , where k
is estimated numerically. High values of k indicate sensitivity to perturbations, which is typically associated with complex
dynamical systems, such as those that occur in deterministic chaos.

Statistics of Sampled Trajectories Displaying Innovation (INN)
Tables 8 and 9 show the resulting statistics for sampled o that were found to be innovative (INN) according to Deﬁnition 2.
Table 8 includes all three CA variants as well as ECA counterfactual trajectories used as a control. Table 9 shows results for
state-dependent Case I CA as a function of varying environment size we. Innovative o were identiﬁed as having a state-trajectory
that cannot be reproduced by any closed, ﬁxed rule ECA of equivalent width w = wo.

Table 8. Percentage of sampled cases displaying INN for each CA variant.

wo ECA Case I (wo = we) Case II Case III
3
4
5
6
7

99.98
99.97
99.97
99.97
99.97

54.62
74.66
92.56
88.14
97.14

99.82
99.87
99.92
99.94
99.97

0
0
0
0
0

Table 9. Percentage of sampled cases displaying INN for Case I, with varying environment size we.

wo we = 1
30.72
3
33.32
4
32.42
5
35.64
6
52.92
7

2 wo we = wo we = 3
70.10
86.57
96.22
97.03
97.43

54.62
74.66
92.56
88.14
97.14

2 wo we = 2wo we = 5
93.29
97.47
98.72
99.29
99.63

86.04
95.52
98.32
98.91
99.51

2 wo

Recurrence time frequency distributions
The frequency distribution of tr observed for sampled state trajectories of o in Case I, Case II and Case III CA are shown
in Figures 11,12 and 13, respectively. Comparing the three cases reveals that for equivalently sized ensembles of sampled
trajectories for Case I, Case II, and Case III CA, the Case I CA generate OEE cases with higher statistical certainty than either
the Case II or Case III CA for most parameters explored. This is especially true for cases where we > wo in Case I simulations.
From Figure 11 it is evident that larger environments yield more UE cases with tr > tP and in general result in longer observed
recurrence times.

21/37

Case II CA yield fewer OEE cases as wo increases, as evident in Figure 12. As discussed in the main text, Case II is not

scalable as it would require changing the structure of the rules of the organism o.

Case III CA generate fewer OEE cases than Case I as the width of o increases, with no cases observed in our statistical
sample for wo > 7 for µ = 0.5 (Figure 11 bottom panel, leftmost column). The frequency distribution of recurrence times for
Case III CA with µ = 0.01, µ = 0.1 and µ = 0.5 are shown in Figure 11. For smaller values of µ OEE cases are observed for
larger wo. In the context of biological evolution, the mechanism for increasing the number of OEE cases under Case III would
therefore be for systems to evolve toward slower mutation rates over time. However, because the distributions are exponentially
distributed, the number of OEE cases is always exponentially suppressed, representing only a small tail of the distribution. A
ﬁxed width wo execution could always be found in a large enough statistical sample that such that the observed tr would be
greater than the maximum recurrence time observed in a Case I CA with an equivalent organism width wo. However, in general
due to the exponential suppression of cases with larger tr for Case III variants (Figure 13), the ensemble size of sampled cases
will necessarily be much larger for Case III CA than for Case I CA. That is, for a sufﬁciently large ensemble size one could
chose a value of µ and generate a trajectory in a width wo organism with a given recurrence time tr, but would always be able
to ﬁnd an example trajectory of the same tr for a smaller sized ensemble of Case I CA for some environment width we. Due
to the exponential suppression, OEE cases are much rarer for Case III than Case I CA. Additionally, once Case III reach the
terminal attractor their dynamics are not complexity, whereas Case I CA will repeat an attractor state that is in general complex
and is often times open-ended (such that the attractor itself satisﬁes Deﬁnitions 1 and 2). We therefore regard Case III to not be
scalable.

22/37

ECA Rule Complexity of Case I CA
To determine if the complexity observed in Case I CA is intrinsic to the state-dependent mechanism, or is an artifact of a
selection-effect favoring complex rules, we determined the frequency of rules implemented in Case I CA utilizing the Wolfram
classiﬁcation scheme for Elementary Cellular Automata24. There are four Wolfram Classes: Class I and II are regarded as the
least complex, often generating simple repeating patterns. Class III rules are more complex displaying random patterns, and
Class IV are regarded as the most complex, displaying rich dynamical structure (for example, ECA Rule 110, which is known
to be Turing Universal? is a Class IV ECA). We analyze the complexity of ECA rules implemented in the rule trajectories
of Case I CA by considering the frequency of implementation of rules from each class to determine if the complexity of the
observed dynamics is an artifact of the ECA rules or intrinsic to f .

The resulting rank ordered frequency distribution of rules is shown in Figure 14 for all sampled Case I CA of a given
organism width wo, and separately for the OEE cases in Figure 15. Since this data includes statistics for the entire sample of
o of a given width wo included in our study, we call these distributions “metagenomes” to indicate that they represent bulk
statistics over many instances of “organisms” o. The resulting distributions indicate that Case I CA primarily implement Class
I and II rules, indicative that the complexity observed is intrinsic to the state-dependent mechanism and not an artifact of
selective use of ‘complex’ Class III and IV ECA rules. This is true for statistics sampled over all Case I CA (Figure 14), as well
as isolating only OEE cases (Figure 15).

23/37

Distributions of Attractor Sizes
Figures 16 - 17 show box-whisker plots of the attractor sizes for the subsystem o for each ECA and for Case I and Case II
CA (Case III CA terminate in a random, oscillatory attractor and the statistics are therefore not included here, see Section
for discussion). In each ﬁgure, the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1, where ta is the attractor size and tP is the
expected Poincar´e time of an equivalent isolated system (an ECA). Sampled attractors exhibiting unbounded evolution (UE)
have ta/tP > 1 and therefore fall above the black solid line - these are examples of OEE attractors.

24/37

Compressibility and Lyapunov Exponent Values for Case I and II CA
Compressibility and Lyapunov exponent for OEE trajectories sampled from Case I CA
Calculated values for compressibility (C) and Lyapunov exponent (k), as deﬁned in Section , are shown in Figure 19 for the
state trajectory of o for all sampled OEE executions for Case I CA. Comparison of the left panel of Figure 19 with the left
panel of Figure 2 in the main text reveals that the observed C for all OEE cases tends to be lower than that calculated over all
sampled o for Case I: that is, the OEE cases exhibit lower C, consistent with intuition that systems with longer recurrence times
should be ’more complex’. As wo increases, more OEE cases tend to have lower C values, such that larger “organisms” are
more complex.

Likewise, comparing the right panel of Figure 19 with the right panel of Figure 2 in the main text indicates that OEE cases
also tend to have much higher k values than that calculated over all sampled o for Case I, indicative of greater sensitivity to
perturbations in OEE systems. Large values of wo lead to larger k, on average, such that larger OEE “organisms” are more
sensitive to perturbations and therefore display richer, more complex dynamics.

25/37

Comparison of compressibility and Lyapunov exponent for Case I and Case II CA
Calculated values for compressibility (C) and Lyapunov exponent (k), as deﬁned in Section , are compared for Case I and Case
II CA in Figures 20 and 21. Case III is not considered as the long-term dynamics display low complexity for the oscillatory
attractor of the homogenous all-’0’ and all-’1’ states. For both Case I and Case II CA variants, increasing wo yields more OEE
cases with lower C values, such that larger “organisms” are more complex (Figure 20).

Case II CA yield lower C values than Case I for the data shown as a result of the difference in the normalization implemented
in Eq. 6, which for Case II CA is lower since the the width of u is w = wo + 8 for all wo explored, whereas for Case I CA the
width of u is w = 2 ∗ wo (for we = wo as shown). Additionally, as noted Case I is scalable as we can be increased to generate
higher complexity (lower C) cases. The Lyapunov exponent for Case II is in general higher than for Case I, indicating greater
sensitivity to perturbations in the initial condition for Case II CA than Case I. For both CA variants, k increases with increasing
organism size k, such that larger organisms are more complex.

26/37

Larger Systems
Figure 22 shows example executions of Case I state-dependent CA for large organisms of width wo = 101, which visually
demonstrate that the novelty of the dynamics reported herein scale to large system sizes.

References

1. Bedau, M. A., Snyder, E. & Packard, N. H. A classiﬁcation of long-term evolutionary dynamics. In Artiﬁcial life VI,

228–237 (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1998).

2. Bettencourt, L. M., Lobo, J., Helbing, D., K¨uhnert, C. & West, G. B. Growth, innovation, scaling, and the pace of life in

cities. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 104, 7301–7306 (2007).

3. Seyfarth, R. M., Cheney, D. L. & Bergman, T. J. Primate social cognition and the origins of language. Trends in cognitive

sciences 9, 264–266 (2005).

4. Buchanan, A., Packard, N. H. & Bedau, M. A. Measuring the evolution of the drivers of technological innovation in the

patent record. Artiﬁcial life 17, 109–122 (2011).

5. Skusa, A. & Bedau, M. A. Towards a comparison of evolutionary creativity in biological and cultural evolution. Artiﬁcial

6. Oka, M., Hashimoto, Y. & Ikegami, T. Open-ended evolution in a web system. Late Breaking Papers at the European

7. Bedau, M. A. et al. Open problems in artiﬁcial life. Artiﬁcial life 6, 363–376 (2000).

8. Banzhaf, W. et al. Deﬁning and simulating open-ended novelty: requirements, guidelines, and challenges. Theory in

9. Taylor, T. J. From artiﬁcial evolution to artiﬁcial life. Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh. College of Science and

Life 8, 233–242 (2003).

Conference on Artiﬁcial Life 17 (2015).

Biosciences 1–31 (2016).

Engineering. School of Informatics. (1999).

67–85 (2008).

10. Ruiz-Mirazo, K., Umerez, J. & Moreno, A. Enabling conditions for open-ended evolution. Biology & Philosophy 23,

11. Bedau, M. Can biological teleology be naturalized? The Journal of Philosophy 647–655 (1991).

12. Bedau, M. A. & Packard, N. H. Measurement of evolutionary activity, teleology, and life. In Langton, I. C., Taylor, C.,
Farmer, D. & Rasmussen, S. (eds.) Artiﬁcial Life II, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity (M. A. Bedau
and N. H. Packard, 1992).

13. Fernando, C., Kampis, G. & Szathm´ary, E. Evolvability of natural and artiﬁcial systems. Procedia Computer Science 7,

14. Ruiz-Mirazo, K. & Moreno, A. Autonomy in evolution: from minimal to complex life. Synthese 185, 21–52 (2012).

15. Guttenberg, N. & Goldenfeld, N. Cascade of complexity in evolving predator-prey dynamics. Physical review letters 100,

73–76 (2011).

058102 (2008).

16. Ruiz-Mirazo, K., Peret´o, J. & Moreno, A. A universal deﬁnition of life: autonomy and open-ended evolution. Origins of

Life and Evolution of the Biosphere 34, 323–346 (2004).

17. Taylor, T. et al. Open-ended evolution: Perspectives from the oee1 workshop in york. Artiﬁcial Life (2016).

18. Zenil, H. Compression-based investigation of the dynamical properties of cellular automata and other systems. Complex

Systems 19, 1–28 (2010).

19. Walker, S. I. & Davies, P. C. The algorithmic origins of life. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 10, 20120869 (2013).

20. Davies, P. C. & Walker, S. I. The hidden simplicity of biology. Reports on Progress in Physics 79, 102601 (2016).

21. Goldenfeld, N. & Woese, C. Life is physics: Evolution as a collective phenomenon far from equilibrium. Annu. Rev.

Condens. Matter Phys. 2, 375–399 (2011).

22. Douglas, R. H. G¨odel, escher, bach: An eternal golden braid (Basic Books, New York, 1979).

23. Noble, D. A theory of biological relativity: no privileged level of causation. Interface Focus 2, 55–64 (2012).

24. Wolfram, S. A New Kind of Science, vol. 5 (Wolfram Media Champaign, 2002).

25. Smith, E. Thermodynamics of natural selection i: Energy ﬂow and the limits on organization. Journal of theoretical

biology 252, 185–197 (2008).

27/37

26. Pavlic, T. P., Adams, A. M., Davies, P. C. & Walker, S. I. Self-referencing cellular automata: A model of the evolution
of information control in biological systems. Proc. of the Fourteenth International Conference on the Synthesis and
Simulation of Living Systems (ALIFE 14) (2014).

27. Tisseur, P. Cellular automata and lyapunov exponents. Nonlinearity 13, 1547 (2000).

28. Ellis, G. F. Top-down causation and emergence: some comments on mechanisms. Interface Focus rsfs20110062 (2011).

29. Walker, S. I., Cisneros, L. & Davies, P. C. Evolutionary transitions and top-down causation. Proceedings of Artiﬁcial Life

30. Levary, D., Eckmann, J.-P., Moses, E. & Tlusty, T. Loops and self-reference in the construction of dictionaries. Physical

31. Kataoka, N. & Kaneko, K. Functional dynamics. i: Articulation process. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 138, 225–250

XIII 283–290 (2012).

Review X 2, 031018 (2012).

(2000).

32. Taylor, T. Redrawing the boundary between organism and environment. Proceedings of Artiﬁcial Life IX 268–273 (2004).

33. Laubichler, M. D. & Renn, J. Extended evolution: A conceptual framework for integrating regulatory networks and niche
construction. Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular and Developmental Evolution 324, 565–577 (2015).

Acknowledgements

This project was made possible through support of a grant from the Templeton World Charity Foundation. The opinions
expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of Templeton World Charity
Foundation. We thank S. Wolfram, T. Rowland, T. Beynon, A. Rueda-Toicen, and C. Marletto, and the Emergence group at
ASU for helpful discussions related to this work.

Author contributions

A.A., H.Z. and S.I.W. designed the research; A.A. and S.I.W. performed research; A.A., H.Z., P.D. and S.I.W. analyzed
data; A.A., H.Z., P.D. and S.I.W. wrote the paper. All data and related code has been made publically available at https:
//github.com/alyssa-adams/OEE_Project.

Competing ﬁnancial interests

The author(s) declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.

28/37

Figure 11. Frequency distributions of recurrence times tr for Case I CA with we = wo (leftmost column), we = 3
middle), we = 2wo (right middle) and we = 5
respectively. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of an isolated ECA of width wo is highlighted by the black vertical line in each
panel.

2 wo (rightmost column). For rows from top to bottom, wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7

2 wo (left

29/37

Figure 12. Frequency distributions of recurrence times tr for Case II CA. From top to bottom, wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7
respectively. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of an isolated ECA of width wo is highlighted by the black vertical line in each
panel.

30/37

Figure 13. Frequency distributions of tr for Case III CA with µ = 0.01 (left), µ = 0.1 (middle) and µ = 0.5 (right). From top
to bottom, wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 respectively. The Poincar´e recurrence time tP of an isolated ECA of width wo is highlighted by
the black vertical line in each panel.

31/37

Figure 14. Rank ordered frequency distributions of rules (“metagenomes”) implemented by o in its attractor. From top to
bottom we = 1
2 wo, respectively. Highlighted in blue are the frequencies of Class I and II rules (left),
Class III rules (middle) and Class IV rules (right).

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

32/37

Figure 15. Rank ordered frequency distributions of rules (“metagenomes”) implemented by o in its attractor for OEE cases
only. From top to bottom we = 1
2 wo, respectively. Highlighted in blue are the frequencies of Class I and
II rules (left), Class III rules (middle) and Class IV rules (right).

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

Figure 16. Distribution of attractor sizes ta for the state trajectory of for all 88 non-equivalent ECA rules, evolved from all
possible initial conditions of width wo. Attractor sizes are normalized to the Poincar´e time tP = 2wo for an isolated ECA, where
the black horizontal line indicates where tr/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale).

33/37

Figure 17. Distribution of attractor sizes ta for the state trajectory of o, for Case II CA. Attractor sizes are normalized to the
Poincar´e time tP = 2wo for an isolated ECA. The black horizontal line indicates where ta/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale).
Sample trajectories displaying unbounded evolution (UE) occur for ta/tP > 1.

34/37

Figure 18. Distribution of attractor sizes ta for the state trajectory of o for Case I CA. Shown from top to bottom are
distributions for we = 1
for an isolated ECA. The black horizontal line indicates where ta/tP = 1 (shown on a log scale). Sampled trajectories
displaying UE occur for tr/tP > 1.

2 wo, respectively. Attractor sizes are normalized to the Poincar´e time tP = 2wo

2 wo, 2wo and 5

2 wo, wo, 3

35/37

Figure 19. Heat maps of compression C (left) and Lyapunov exponent values k (right) for sampled OEE trajectories for the
states of o for Case I CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, with distributions shown for we = 1
2 wo, 2wo and
5
2 wo (from top to bottom, respectively) for each wo. Distributions are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for
each wo and we (see statistics in Table 5).

2 wo, wo, 3

Figure 20. Heat maps of compression C for all sampled trajectories of the states of o (left), and for OEE trajectories only
(right) shown for Case I and Case II CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. For each wo shown are the distributions of C
for Case I CA for we = wo (top row in each panel) and for Case II CA with we = 8 (bottom row in each panel). Distributions
are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for each wo and we for each CA variant (see statistics in Tables 5 and 6).

36/37

Figure 21. Heat maps of Lyapunov exponent k for all sampled trajectories of the states of o (left), and for OEE trajectories
only (right) shown for Case I and Case II CA. From top to bottom wo = 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. For each wo shown are the distributions
of k for Case I CA for we = wo (top row in each panel) and for Case II CA with we = 8 (bottom row in each panel).
Distributions are normalized to the total size of sampled trajectories for each wo and we for each CA variant (see statistics in
Tables 5 and 6).

Figure 22. Example executions of the state trajectory of o for Case I CA for large system size wo = 101, with we = wo.

37/37

