7
1
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
2
 
 
]

C
N
.
o
i
b
-
q
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
0
0
1
.
3
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

EXPLORING HERITABILITY OF FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS WITH INEXACT
GRAPH MATCHING

Soﬁa Ira Ktena, Salim Arslan, Sarah Parisot, Daniel Rueckert

Biomedical Image Analysis Group, Imperial College London, UK

ABSTRACT

Data-driven brain parcellations aim to provide a more accu-
rate representation of an individual’s functional connectivity,
since they are able to capture individual variability that arises
due to development or disease. This renders comparisons be-
tween the emerging brain connectivity networks more chal-
lenging, since correspondences between their elements are
not preserved. Unveiling these correspondences is of ma-
jor importance to keep track of local functional connectivity
changes. We propose a novel method based on graph edit
distance for the comparison of brain graphs directly in their
domain, that can accurately reﬂect similarities between indi-
vidual networks while providing the network element corre-
spondences. This method is validated on a dataset of 116 twin
subjects provided by the Human Connectome Project.

Index Terms— functional brain connectivity, twin study,

graph matching

1. INTRODUCTION

The extremely complex circuit of our central nervous sys-
tem constitutes the primary means of information transmis-
sion within the brain, and is responsible for different cognitive
functions. Structural brain connectivity can be examined at
the macroscale to obtain a complete map of the neuroanatom-
ical connections between brain regions, the so-called human
connectome [1]. Functional connectivity, in turn, can be used
to explore the temporal dependency between neurophysiolog-
ical events and expresses network behaviour underlying high
level cognitive processes [2].

Individual differences in network topology of the connec-
tome have previously been associated with heritable pheno-
types such as intelligence [3], giving rise to questions regard-
ing the heritability of network topology itself. Addressing
these questions would be a leap forward in understanding
mechanisms through which genetic inﬂuences on brain mor-
phology eventually contribute to human behaviour in health
and disease. In this context, twin designs have recently been
used to study the genetic inﬂuence on both structural [4, 5]
and functional [6, 7, 8] brain connectivity. More speciﬁcally,
Bohlken et al. [4] studied the extent to which genes shape the
topology of structural brain connectivity. They estimated a

signiﬁcant heritability index for normalised clustering coefﬁ-
cient and characteristic path length. A similar study [5] per-
formed probabilistic tractography on healthy adults and ob-
tained similarly signiﬁcant heritability for global efﬁciency
and network strength. Global efﬁciency of functional net-
works was also found to be under genetic control in [6], while
Fu et al. [7] tried to gain insight into the genetic basis of rest-
ing state networks (RSNs) with a voxelwise genetic analysis.
Yang et al. [8] explored the heritability of intrinsic connec-
tivity networks (ICNs) and found interactions between them
to be mostly inﬂuenced by environmental factors, despite the
fact that the activity of most ICNs is driven by genetic factors.
In all studies mentioned above, brain parcellations have
been employed to construct lower dimensional graph rep-
resentations of the brain networks. The delineation of dis-
tinct brain regions is often based on information derived
from anatomical atlases or regions of interest reported in
the literature [9]. However, anatomical landmarks like the
sulci and gyri might not necessarily align with functional
boundaries between brain regions, hence data-driven ap-
proaches have also been used to parcellate the brain. These
can be group-based, ensuring correspondences between sub-
jects, or tailored for individual subjects to account for inter-
subject variability and discard the constraints of standardised
anatomy [10, 11].
In the latter case, however, correspon-
dences across parcellations/subjects are not preserved, while
individual networks might even entail a different number
of nodes. Thus, these methods require more sophisticated
approaches for graph comparison than the standard network
measures used in the previous studies.

This problem is addressed in [12] by aligning the individ-
ual connectivity matrices with simulated annealing to study
the differences in structural connectivity between age groups.
However, this method does not account for any characteristic
information of a region, other than its connectivity proﬁle to
the rest of the brain. A graph kernel, which captures struc-
tural, geometric and functional information, is used in [13]
to evaluate similarity between graphs. Nevertheless, the lat-
ter does not provide element correspondences of the networks
compared. In this work we propose a method based on graph
edit distance to assess brain graph similarity and obtain el-
ement correspondences between individual subject networks
and show that it can successfully reﬂect genetic similarities.

Fig. 1: Parcellations of an individual’s left hemisphere ob-
tained with k-means clustering (the contribution of rs-fMRI
timeseries against spatial coordinates is c = 10, 50, 75, 100%
from left to right, while the number of parcels remains the
same). The higher the contribution of rs-fMRI time series the
less the smoothness and spatial contiguity of the parcels, i.e.
parcels may be spatially scattered across the hemisphere.

2. METHODS

2.1. Dataset and preprocessing

The dataset used in this study is minimally preprocessed and
provided by the Human Connectome Project [14].
It con-
sists of 50 healthy unrelated subjects, 66 female monozygotic
(MZ) twins and 50 female dizygotic (DZ) twins. The avail-
able data for each subject include two resting-state fMRI (rs-
fMRI) sessions that are preprocessed to remove spatial arti-
facts and distortions and are, ﬁnally, converted to a standard
“grayordinate” space to facilitate cross-subject comparisons.
Additionally, the time series for each grayordinate is denoised
and normalised to zero mean and unit variance.

2.2. Network construction

In order to obtain a network representation of an individ-
ual’s functional brain connectivity, the network elements, i.e.
nodes and edges, need to be deﬁned. In this study, k-means
clustering is applied to the rs-fMRI data [15], in order to par-
cellate the brain into N regions with distinct rs-fMRI acti-
vation patterns. The number of parcels, N , may vary and
determines the number of nodes within the network. The spa-
tial coordinates can also be taken into account along with the
fMRI time series during clustering. The effect of introduc-
ing such spatial information on the parcellation is illustrated
in Fig. 1. Subsequently, the average time series within each
parcel is used to represent the corresponding node. The con-
nection strength between two nodes, namely the edge weight,
is estimated from the partial correlation of the representative
time series, in order to discard the indirect functional connec-
tions between two cortical regions.

2.3. Similarity estimates

1) Matrix alignment with simulated annealing (SA). Simu-
lated annealing was used in [12] to align structural connec-
tivity networks generated with random parcellations. It is a

Fig. 2: (a) Single-subject parcellation of an individual’s cor-
tex with a parcel pi covering part of the occipital, temporal
and parietal lobes highlighted. (b) Anatomical labels from the
Desikan atlas for the same subject, with the boundary of the
region corresponding to pi outlined. (c) Functional network
with nodes obtained using parcellation (a) and edge weights
estimated with partial correlation between the representative
rs-fMRI time series of the connected nodes; the node ni cor-
responding to pi is highlighted with a gray color. (d) Anatom-
ical label histogram for node ni.

commonly used method for multiple sequence alignment of
biological sequences. In this approach, a series of node re-
orderings is attempted in one of the adjacency matrices, in
order to ﬁnd a better alignment that minimizes the distance
metric between the two matrices, which in this case is the ab-
solute or square distance. Simulated annealing is a global op-
timization technique which uses a “temperature factor” that
determines the rate at which reorderings take place and the
likelihood of each reordering. The implementation is based
on the matrix alignment function of the Brain Connectivity
Toolbox (http://www.brain-connectivity-toolbox.net [16]).

2) Graph edit distance (GED). Graph edit distance is a
non-negative function that evaluates the similarity between
two graphs directly in their domain G and is able to model
structural network variations in an intuitive way. In order to
calculate the graph edit distance, the minimum cost edit path
that transforms one graph into another needs to be estimated.
The total cost of this edit path is deﬁned as the sum of all edit
operations, which in this case might include node and edge
additions, deletions and substitutions:

dGED(G, G(cid:48)) = min
o∈O

(cid:88)

i

c(oi)

(1)

where c(oi) is the cost of edit operation oi, o = (o1, . . . , ok)

is an edit sequence from G to G(cid:48), and O the ﬁnite set of edit
sequences from G to G(cid:48).

Graph edit distance allows us to incorporate label infor-
mation about the network elements in the distance estimate.
In the proposed approach, the histogram of anatomical labels
of the voxels constituting a parcel is used to characterize each
node (Fig. 2).

Edit costs. The costs of edit operations are deﬁned as
follows: a cost of |eij| is used for inserting or deleting an
edge of weight eij. The cost of node insertion or deletion
is equal to the cost of insertion or deletion of all edges at-

imum cost across the different runs is preserved and plotted in
Fig. 3. It can be observed that, although the median distance
tends to be higher between MZ pairs compared to single sub-
ject networks as well as between DZ pairs compared to MZ,
the mean values obtained with SA do not provide a signif-
icant separation between these populations. Also, distances
between unrelated pairs are almost at the same level as MZ
pairs. This result is consistent across different resolutions, re-
gardless of the contiguity of the parcels.

On the contrary, GED estimates capture the greater simi-
larity that is expected between networks of the same subject,
as well as between MZ pairs compared to DZ and unrelated
pairs (Fig. 4).
It can also be observed that the more data-
less effect of spatial coordi-
driven the parcellation is (i.e.
nates), the better the separation between MZ and DZ twin
pairs. This indicates that the parcellation describes individ-
ual connectivity more accurately, while the speciﬁc distance
measure successfully reﬂects that.

3.2. Network element correspondences

The node correspondences obtained with the two different
distance measures for a MZ twin pair are visually compared in
Fig. 5. It can be observed that since SA is unaware of the node
labels, swaps between nodes from different hemispheres can
take place (red arrows). Nevertheless, in the case of GED cor-
respondences, nodes are matched accurately, with important
functional connections maintained between matched nodes
for both twin subjects (black arrows).

4. CONCLUSION

We propose a novel approach for evaluating similarities be-
tween functional brain networks, derived from individual sub-
ject parcellations. The method successfully reﬂects greater
similarities between networks from the same subject, as well
as from MZ twin pairs compared to DZ and unrelated pairs. It
also correctly identiﬁes correspondences between network el-
ements paving the way for comparisons between healthy and
diseased populations using data-driven individual networks
that might even consist of different numbers of nodes.

5. REFERENCES

[1] O Sporns, G Tononi, and R Kötter, “The human con-
nectome: a structural description of the human brain,”
PLoS Comput Biol, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. e42, 2005.

[2] B Biswal et al., “Functional connectivity in the motor
cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI,”
Magn Res in Medicine, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 537–541,
1995.

[3] Y Li et al., “Brain anatomical network and intelligence,”
PLoS Comput Biol, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. e1000395, 2009.

Fig. 3: Minimum distances obtained with SA on networks de-
rived from parcellations using only fMRI data (c = 100%);
absolute (left) and square difference (right) were used to esti-
mate distance between two connectivity matrices. Results are
similar for parcellations with different fMRI contributions.

tached to it, i.e. ci→ε = cε→i = (cid:80)
j |eij|. Moreover, the
cost of modifying edge eij to e(cid:48)
ij (i.e. edge substitution), is
weighted by the cosine distance dcosine of the correspond-
ing node label histograms. This means that if node i of G
with label histogram hi = (li1, . . . , lim) is substituted by
node i(cid:48) of G(cid:48) with label histogram hi(cid:48) = (li(cid:48)1, . . . , li(cid:48)m), then
ij| for all j, j(cid:48). Node sub-
ceij→e(cid:48)
stitutions are only allowed between nodes on the same hemi-
sphere and with dcosine(hi, hi(cid:48)) < 1, hence the cost of any
other substitution is inﬁnite.

= dcosine(hi, hi(cid:48))×|eij −e(cid:48)

ij

It should be noted that the exact GED computation is ex-
ponential in terms of time and space to the number of nodes
involved, making its application computationally prohibitive
when the dimensionality of the network increases. Therefore,
an approximate estimate of GED is used instead, which is
based on minimum cost bipartite matching [17].

3. RESULTS

3.1. Estimated distances

Since the provided dataset consists of two rs-fMRI sessions
(acquired 1 day apart), two different data-driven parcellations
and functional connectivity networks can be generated for
each individual. The distances between two networks of the
same subject are compared to the distances estimated between
all MZ and DZ twin pairs, as well as unrelated pairs. Ideally,
the distance measure should be able to reﬂect the similarities
due to genetic factors, i.e. yield lower distances for MZ than
DZ twin pairs, while distances between networks of the same
subject should be even lower. We compare the results ob-
tained with matrix alignment using simulated annealing and
the proposed method (graph edit distance) along different lev-
els of parcellation granularity and fMRI data contribution (for
a direct comparison see Figs. 3 and 4c).

Since the distance estimate as well as the ﬁnal alignment
of the matrices in the SA approach is dependent on the initial
alignment of the matrices, 100 random permutations of the
connectivity matrix are computed and fed to the matrix align-
ment algorithm. In the end, the alignment that yields the min-

Fig. 4: GED values calculated for networks of size N = 50, 100, 150 and varying contribution of rs-fMRI data to the parcella-
tion. Permutation test results are shown as non-signiﬁcant (n.s.), p < 0.05 (*), p < 0.01 (**), p < 0.0001 (****).

tional networks: A twin study,” Hum Brain Mapp, vol.
36, no. 10, pp. 3959–3972, 2015.

[8] Z Yang et al., “Genetic and environmental contribu-
tions to functional connectivity architecture of the hu-
man brain,” Cereb Cortex, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 2341–
2352, 2016.

[9] R Salvador et al., “Neurophysiological architecture of
functional magnetic resonance images of human brain,”
Cereb Cortex, vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 1332–1342, 2005.

[10] S Arslan, S Parisot, and D Rueckert, “Joint spectral de-
composition for the parcellation of the human cerebral
cortex using resting-state fmri,” in IPMI, 2015, pp. 85–
97.

[11] S Parisot et al., “GraMPa: Graph-based multi-modal
parcellation of the cortex using fusion moves,” in MIC-
CAI, 2016, pp. 148–156.

[12] O Tymoﬁyeva et al., “Brain without anatomy: construc-
tion and comparison of fully network-driven structural
mri connectomes,” PloS One, vol. 9, no. 5, 2014.

[13] S Takerkart et al., “Graph-based inter-subject pattern

analysis of fMRI data,” PloS One, vol. 9, no. 8, 2014.

[14] MF Glasser et al., “The minimal preprocessing pipelines
for the human connectome project,” NeuroImage, vol.
80, pp. 105–124, 2013.

Fig. 5: Node correspondences indicated with matching col-
ors between twin1 (a) and twin2 for a MZ pair obtained
with matrix alignment (b) and graph edit distance (c). Red
arrows show mismatched nodes/node swaps from different
hemispheres. Black arrows show correctly matched nodes.

[4] MM Bohlken et al., “Heritability of structural brain net-
work topology: a DTI study of 156 twins,” Hum Brain
Mapp, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 5295–5305, 2014.

[15] B Thirion et al., “Which fMRI clustering gives good
brain parcellations?,” Front in Neurosc, vol. 8, pp. 167,
2014.

[5] L Zhan et al., “Heritability of brain network topology in
853 twins and siblings,” in ISBI, 2015, pp. 449–453.

[6] MP van den Heuvel et al., “Genetic control of functional
brain network efﬁciency in children,” Eur Neuropsych,
vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 19–23, 2013.

[7] Y Fu et al., “Genetic inﬂuences on resting-state func-

[16] M Rubinov and O Sporns, “Complex network measures
of brain connectivity: uses and interpretations,” Neu-
roImage, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 1059–1069, 2010.

[17] K Riesen, M Neuhaus, and H Bunke, “Bipartite graph
matching for computing the edit distance of graphs,”
in Graph-Based Representations in Pattern Recognition,
pp. 1–12. Springer, 2007.

