A PropBank for Portuguese: the CINTIL-PropBank

Ant´onio Branco, Catarina Carvalheiro, S´ılvia Pereira, Mariana Avel˜as, Clara Pinto,
Sara Silveira, Francisco Costa, Jo˜ao Silva, S´ergio Castro, Jo˜ao Grac¸a

University of Lisbon
Edif´ıcio C6, Departamento de Inform´atica
Faculdade de Ciˆencias, Universidade de Lisboa
Campo Grande, 1749-016, Portugal
{antonio.branco, catarina.carvalheiro, silvia.pereira, mariana.avelas,
clara.pinto, sara.silveira, fcosta, jsilva, sergio.castro}@di.fc.ul.pt

Abstract
With the CINTIL-International Corpus of Portuguese, an ongoing corpus annotated with fully ﬂegded grammatical representation,
sentences get not only a high level of lexical, morphological and syntactic annotation but also a semantic analysis that prepares the data
to a manual speciﬁcation step and thus opens the way for a number of tools and resources for which there is a great research focus
at the present. This paper reports on the construction of a propbank that builds on CINTIL-DeepGramBank, with nearly 10 thousand
sentences, on the basis of a deep linguistic grammar and on the process and the linguistic criteria guiding that construction, which makes
possible to obtain a complete PropBank with both syntactic and semantic levels of linguistic annotation. Taking into account this and
the promising scores presented in this study for inter-annotator agreement, CINTIL-PropBank presents itself as a great resource to train
a semantic role labeller, one of our goals with this project.

Keywords: propbank, portuguese, annotated corpus

1.

Introduction

2. A PropBank supported by a deep

Following the important methodological breakthrough that
took place in Language Technology with the advent of sta-
tistical approaches, the development of annotated corpora
has been deployed around adding increasingly more com-
plex linguistic information, e.g. concerning phrase con-
stituency (aka TreeBanks (Marcus et al., 1993)), syntactic
functions (aka DependencyBanks (B¨ohmov´a et al., 2001)),
and phrase-level semantic roles (aka PropBanks (Palmer et
al., 2005)), just to mention a few salient examples.
To keep advancing along this trend and to develop corpora
that are annotated with deep linguistic representations, the
construction of annotated corpora faces a challenge that de-
mands a new qualitative step: the fully ﬂedged grammatical
representation to be assigned to each sentence is so com-
plex and so speciﬁc to that sentence that it cannot be re-
liably crafted manually piece by piece and the annotation
cannot be performed without some supporting application,
viz. a computational grammar.
This paper discusses the solutions we developed to con-
struct a propbank on the basis of a deep linguistic grammar
and its companion deep linguistic treebank (Branco et al.,
2010), with a central goal: the construction of a high qual-
ity data set with semantic information that could support the
development of automatic semantic role labellers (Baker et
al., 2007; Carreras and M`arquez, 2005) for Portuguese.
Section 2 reports on the construction of a propbank on the
basis of a corpora annotated with a deep linguistic grammar.
In Section 3, we describe the extraction of semi-annotated
constituency trees with automatic semantic roles that assist
the manual completion step of our dynamic propbank, pre-
sented in Section 4. In Section 5, we enumerate some apli-
cations of the PropBank, and Section 6 presents the con-
cluding remarks.

linguistic grammar

The deep linguistic grammar used for the initial semi-
automatic propbanking was LXGram, a grammar for
the computational processing of Portuguese (Branco and
Costa, 2010; Branco and Costa, 2008a; Branco and Costa,
2008b), developed under the grammatical framework of
HPSG (Pollard and Sag, 1994) which uses MRS (Copes-
take et al., 2005) for the representation of meaning and the
Grammar Matrix (Bender et al., 2002) for the initial type
system. In a ﬁrst phase, the parses obtained with LXGram
and manually selected by human annotators were gathered
in the CINTIL-DeepGramBank, a corpus of deep grammat-
ical representations, composed by sentences taken from the
CINTIL-International Corpus of Portuguese with 1 million
tokens of written and spoken linguistic materials (Branco et
al., 2010).
The construction of the CINTIL-DeepGramBank was per-
formed adopting the annotation procedure where indepen-
dent annotators produce primary data and their decisions
are validated in a subsequent adjudication phase by a third
independent annotator. More speciﬁcally, each sentence
was automatically processed by LX-Suite (Silva, 2007) and
analysed by LXGram (Branco and Costa, 2010): once a set
of grammatical analysis is obtained (parse forest), two in-
dependent annotators choose the analysis each one of them
considers to be correct. In case of divergence between their
decisions, a third independent adjudicator reviews their op-
tions and makes the ﬁnal choice. The annotators and adju-
dicators are language experts with post-graduate degrees in
Linguistics.
The workbench used to support this process of annotation
was [incr tsdb()] (Oepen, 2001), which permits to parse,
select and collect fully ﬂedged deep grammatical represen-

1516

tations for the respective sentences. Annotation speed is
roughly 80 to 100 sentences per day. At the moment, last
stable version 3 of the CINTIL-DeepGramBank is com-
posed of 5422 sentences. For this version, the level of inter-
annotator agreement (ITA) scores 0.86 in terms of the spe-
ciﬁc inter-annotator metric we developed for this kind of
corpora and annotation (Castro, 2011). Since the CINTIL-
DeepGramBank keeps being developed, we have an addi-
tional 4047 sentences in the ongoing version 4, with 0.80
of inter-annotator agreement.

section),

the manual

selection of

3. Extracting semi-annotated
constituency trees
Propbanks are syntactic constituency treebanks whose trees
have their constituents labeled with semantic role tags
(Palmer et al., 2005). Propbanks are thus annotated corpora
that result from the extension of the annotation associated
to the sentences in treebanks by means of an extra layer of
linguistic information for semantic roles.
the correct analyses
After
(described in the previous
the CINTIL-
DeepGramBank was processed in order to obtain only
the syntactic constituency trees.1 To achieve this, the tool
lkb2standard (Silva et al., 2010) was developed to extract
these trees from the ﬁles exported by [incr tsdb()]. These
are trees that are then ready to be extended to form the
CINTIL-PropBank, by means of their enrichment with
appropriate semantic role tags.
Some of the semantic role labels in the tag set used in this
PropBank can be obtained directly from the deep grammat-
ical representations and through this extraction tool. This is
done by resorting to the feature structures that describe the
semantics of the sentence in the CINTIL-DeepGramBank,
namely those used to represent the arguments of predica-
tors, ARG1 to ARGn. Furthermore, the extraction tool
lkb2standard was designed to play a role that goes beyond
the mere extraction of the constituency tree annotated with
these ARG1 to ARGn labels. By resorting to the details
of the deep grammatical representation, it permits to la-
bel phrases with a number of further labels that account for
phrases that, on the surface level, are associated with more
than one argument (see Figure 1, for example):

• ARG1 – Argument 1

e.g. O Jo˜ao deu uma ﬂor `a Maria. (“Jo˜ao gave Maria
a ﬂower.”)

• ARG2 – Argument 2

e.g. O Jo˜ao deu uma ﬂor `a Maria. (idem)

• ARG3 – Argument 3

e.g. O Jo˜ao deu uma ﬂor `a Maria. (idem)

• ARG11 – Argument 1 of subordinating predicator and
Argument 1 in the subordinate clause (semantic func-
tion of Subjects of so called Subject Control predica-
tors)
e.g. As crianc¸as n˜ao querem dormir. (“The children
don’t want to go to sleep.”)

• ARG21 – Argument 2 of subordinating predicator and
Argument 1 in the subordinate clause (semantic func-
tion of Subjects of so called Direct Object Control
predicators)
e.g. Uma oferta obrigou o Jo˜ao a tomar medidas.
(“An offer made Jo˜ao take action.”)

• ARGncp – Argument n in complex predicate con-

structions
e.g. O cliente podia estar mais conﬁante. (“The client
could have been more conﬁdent.”)

• ARGnac – Argument n of anticausative readings
e.g. O doente acordou. (“The patient woke up.”)

4. Manual PropBanking:
completing the annotation
Building on the information made explicit by the deep lin-
guistic grammar, the remaining phrases that are modiﬁers,
associated with non argumental positions, are left with the
semantic role tag M, as we can see in Figure 1.
There are two further tools supporting this manual phase of
annotation described below aimed at specifying the seman-
tic role of modiﬁers: one converts trees into an annotation
format compatible with the annotation interface (see Fig-
ure 2); and a reverser tool for the inverse operation (trans-
formed trees, such as the one shown in Figure 3).2
As the outcome of the operation of the ﬁrst of them, the set
of sentences to be annotated can be presented in a spread-
sheet ﬁle, with each sentence in a different sheet. For each
suite of treebanked sentences, a spreadsheet is created with
as many sheets as there are sentences in that suite. If a given
sentence happens not to have received a parse, its sheet only
contains its identiﬁcation number and that sentence.
As we can see in Figure 2, each line has cells automatically
ﬁlled in, and others to be manually ﬁlled in by the annotator.
Each line includes: in column (A), the syntactic category
and grammatical function; in column (B), the semantic role
assigned by the grammar; in (C), the cell to be ﬁlled in by
the human annotator; in (D), the constituent being tagged,
and in (E) the possible observations from the annotator.
A completion step followed that consists in the manual
speciﬁcation of the occurrences of this portmanteau tag M
in terms of one of the semantic roles available for modiﬁers
in our tag set:

• LOC – Location: to locate an action in place, whether

physical or abstract (see Figure 4)

• EXT – Extension:

to use with strings with an ex-
tension notion, mainly numerical. Includes measures,
percentages, quantiﬁers, and comparative expressions
(see Figure 4)

• CAU – Cause: to determine a cause, a reason of an

action (see Figure 5)

• TMP – Temporal: to locate an action in time, includ-
ing the frequency, duration, and repetition (see Figure
4)

1For a detailed account of the linguistic options that are behind

2For a more detailed account of this annotation environment

the syntactic constituency, see (Branco et al., 2011).

and process, see (Branco et al., 2009).

1517

Figure 1: CINTIL-DeepGramBank constituency tree with semantic M tags highlighted for: Decidimos trabalhar em con-
junto e cooperar nas quest˜oes delicadas (“We decided to work together and cooperate on the delicate issues”).

Figure 2: Spreadsheet annotation interface for specifying semantic roles of the M tags for: Decidimos trabalhar em conjunto
e cooperar nas quest˜oes delicadas (“We decided to work together and cooperate on the delicate issues”).

Figure 3: CINTIL-PropBank tree with manual MNR and ADV tags and automatic PRED tag highlighted for: Decidimos
trabalhar em conjunto e cooperar nas quest˜oes delicadas (“We decided to work together and cooperate on the delicate
issues”).

1518

Figure 4: CINTIL-PropBank tree with the semantic roles EXT, TMP, LOC, and DIR highlighted for: S´o quando sentiu uma
m˜ao no ombro levantou os olhos do ch˜ao (“Only when he felt a hand on his shoulder did he raise his eyes from the ﬂoor”).

Figure 5: CINTIL-PropBank tree with the semantic role CAU highlighted for: Eles falharam por v´arias raz˜oes conjunturais
(“They failed for many conjunctural reasons”).

• PNC – Purpose, goal: to all strings that describe a goal

or a proposal of a given action (see Figure 6)

• MNR – Manner: to all strings that speciﬁes the way,
manner how an action is realized or due (see Figure 3)

• DIR – Direction:

to reference directions, covering

both the source/origin and destination (see Figure 4)

• POV – Point of View: to strings that expresses an au-

thor position about a given event (see Figure 7)

• PRED – Secondary predication: to all cases of pred-
icative structures, mainly past participles and resulta-
tive constructions

• ADV – Adverbial: to strings that do not fall into any

of the other categories (see Figure 3)

At this point, it is important to note that, in the case of at-
tributes and relative clauses with A-M, AP-M and CP-M
tags at the constituency level, the tag M (at the third level,
the semantic role) is automatically replaced by PRED at
this step of conversion (see and compare Figures 1 and 3
for the phrase “nas quest˜oes delicadas”).

This manual phase of the construction of the PropBank is
always done by two independent annotators, who choose
the tags each one of them consider to be correct. In case of
divergence between annotators, a third independent adjudi-
cator reviews their decisions and makes the ﬁnal choice.
The annotators are experts with post-graduations in Lin-
guistics. The annotation speed is around 200 sentences per
day. According to our latest data, from stable version 3
(5422 sentences), the level of inter-annotator agreement is
over 0.75 in terms of the k-coefﬁcient. For the ongoing
version 4 (with an extra 4047 sentences), the level of inter-
annotator agreement is 0.76.

When this manual propbanking is ﬁnalized, the sentences
— now extended with the newly assigned tags for the se-
mantic roles of modiﬁers — are reverted back into the orig-
inal tree representation. This operation is ensured by a re-
verting tool that takes the data in the sheets of the spread-
sheet and recombines the new information added by the hu-
man annotator with the original information (grammatical
category and syntactic functions) about the parse tree of the
sentence. We have now a complete PropBank with the two
information levels: phrase constituency and phrase-level
semantic roles. As can be seen in Figure 3, we have now
all the M tags replaced by fully speciﬁed semantic values:

1519

Figure 6: CINTIL-PropBank tree with the semantic role PNC highlighted for: Vamos ter de jogar para os pontos e para as
vit´orias (“We’re going to have to play for points and victories”).

Figure 7: CINTIL-PropBank tree with the semantic role POV highlighted for: Para mim, isso ´e importante (“To me, that’s
important”).

ADV and MNR tags. Recall that, in this case, the PRED
tag was automatically assigned at the conversion step that
generated the spreadsheet.
At this point, with all propbanking guidelines, criteria, and
process succinctly described, we are able to attest how do
the labels enumerated in previous section work through ex-
amples illustrating their assignment (see Figures 4 to 7).

5. Some applications of the PropBank

It is important to note that with the automatic PropBank-
ing phase it was already possible to extract treebanks and
dependencybanks since CINTIL-DeepGramBank already
contains the constituency structure with syntactic informa-
tion, which is enough to extract a treebank, and syntactic
functions tags, which can be used to build a dependency-
bank. With the second PropBanking step — manual speciﬁ-
cation of semantic role tags — we now have an opportunity
to get an added value, a resource to train a semantic role la-
beller.3 A semantic role labeller allows to correctly identify

3This application is currently under development and testing

with the current version of the CINTIL-PropBank.

the various semantic roles in a sentence enabling the recog-
nition of relations between their elements, such as who did
what, what happened to whom, etc. With these semantic
values, we have a world of new possibilities to improve or
create tools and resources for areas such as question an-
swering, information extraction, summarization, machine
learning, and information retrieval on the web which opens
the possibility for semantic web searching.

6. Concluding remarks

In this paper, we reported on the solutions we followed
to develop a propbank with almost 10 thousand sentences.
This propbank was built with the help of a deep linguistic
grammar which permitted to construct a high quality and
reliable data set with semantic information that will sup-
port the training of semantic role labellers for Portuguese.
This resource has also the potential to beneﬁt many other
natural language processing applications, such as informa-
tion extraction, question-answering, summarization, ma-
chine translation, information retrieval, among others.

1520

validation tools for datasets with deep linguistic informa-
tion. Master’s thesis, Universidade de Lisboa, Faculdade
de Ciˆencias, Departamento de Inform´atica, Portugal.
Ann Copestake, Dan Flickinger, Carl Pollard, and Ivan Sag.
2005. Minimal recursion semantics: An introduction.
Research on Language & Computation, 3(4):281–332,
December.

Mitchell Marcus, Mary Marcinkiewicz, and Beatrice San-
torini. 1993. Building a large annotated corpus of en-
glish: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics,
19(2):313–330, June.
Stephan Oepen. 2001.

[incr tsdb()] — competence and
performance laboratory. User manual. Technical re-
port, Computational Linguistics, Saarland University,
Saarbr¨ucken, Germany. in preparation.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury. 2005.
The proposition bank: An annotated corpus of semantic
roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–106, March.
Carl Pollard and Ivan Sag. 1994. Head-Driven Phrase
Structure Grammar. Stanford: Chicago University Press
and CSLI Publications.

Jo˜ao Silva, Ant´onio Branco, S´ergio Castro, and Ruben
Reis. 2010. Out-of-the-box robust parsing of Por-
tuguese. In Proceedings of the 9th Encontro para o Pro-
cessamento Computacional da L´ıngua Portuguesa Es-
crita e Falada (PROPOR), pages 75–85.

Jo˜ao Silva. 2007. Shallow processing of Portuguese: From
sentence chunking to nominal lemmatization. Master’s
thesis, MSc thesis, University of Lisbon. Published as
Technical Report DI-FCUL-TR-07-16, Portugal.

7. References

Colin Baker, Michael Ellsworth, and Katrin Erk. 2007. Se-
mEval’07 task 19: frame semantic structure extraction.
In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluations (SemEval’07, ACL), pages 9–104,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Emily M. Bender, Dan Flickinger, and Stephan Oepen.
2002. The Grammar Matrix: An open-source starter-
kit for the development of cross-linguistically consis-
tent broad-coverage precision grammars. In John Car-
roll, Nelleke Oostdijk, and Richard Sutcliffe, editors,
Procedings of the Workshop on Grammar Engineering
and Evaluation at the 19th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 8–14, Taipei, Taiwan.
Alena B¨ohmov´a, Jan Hajiˇc, Eva Hajiˇcov´a, and Barbora
Hladk´a. 2001. The Prague Dependency Treebank: A
three-level annotation scenario. In Anne Abeill´e, editor,
Treebanks: Building and Using Syntactically Annotated
Corpora, pages 103–127. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Ant´onio Branco and Francisco Costa. 2008a. A com-
putational grammar for deep linguistic processing of
portuguese: LXGram, version A.4.1. Technical Re-
port TR-2008-17, Universidade de Lisboa, Faculdade de
Ciˆencias, Departamento de Inform´atica.

Ant´onio Branco and Francisco Costa. 2008b. LXGram in
the shared task “comparing semantic representations” of
STEP 2008. In Johan Bos and Rodolfo Delmonte, edi-
tors, Semantics in Text Processing. STEP 2008 Confer-
ence Proceedings, volume 1 of Research in Computa-
tional Semantics, pages 299–314. College Publications.
Ant´onio Branco and Francisco Costa. 2010. A deep lin-
guistic processing grammar for Portuguese. In Lecture
Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 6001, pages 86–
89. Springer, Berlin.

Ant´onio Branco, Sara Silveira, S´ergio Castro, Mariana
Avel˜as, Clara Pinto, and Francisco Costa. 2009. Dy-
namic propbanking with deep linguistic grammars. In
Proceedings, TLT009 — The 8th International Workshop
on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, pages 39–50, Mi-
lan.

Ant´onio Branco, Francisco Costa, Jo˜ao Silva, Sara Sil-
veira, S´ergio Castro, Mariana Avel˜as, Clara Pinto, and
Jo˜ao Grac¸a. 2010. Developing a deep linguistic data-
bank supporting a collection of treebanks: the CINTIL
In Proceedings of LREC2010 - The
DeepGramBank.
7th international conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, La Valleta, Malta.

Ant´onio Branco, Jo˜ao Silva, Francisco Costa, and S´ergio
Castro.
2011. CINTIL TreeBank handbook: De-
sign options for the representation of syntactic con-
stituency. Technical Report TR-2011-02. Available at:
http://docs.di.fc.ul.pt/.

Xavier Carreras and Llu´ıs M`arquez. 2005. Introduction
to the CoNLL-2005 shared task: semantic role label-
ing. In Proceedings of the 9th Conference on Compu-
tational Natural Language Learning, CONLL’05, pages
152–164, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

S´ergio Castro. 2011. Developing reliability metrics and

1521

