MREAK : Morphological Retina Keypoint
Descriptor

Himanshu Vaghela
Department of Computer Engineering
D. J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
Mumbai, India
himanshuvaghela1998@gmail.com

Manan Oza
Department of Computer Engineering
D. J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
Mumbai, India
manan.oza0001@gmail.com

Prof. Sudhir Bagul
Department of Computer Engineering
D. J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
Mumbai, India
Sudhir.Bagul@djsce.ac.in

I. INTRODUCTION

(c) Closing

Fig. 1: Morphological operations on an image [10]

9
1
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
2
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
2
8
0
.
1
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—A variety of computer vision applications depend
on the efﬁciency of image matching algorithms used. Various
descriptors are designed to detect and match features in images.
Deployment of this algorithms in mobile applications creates a
need for low computation time. Binary descriptors requires less
computation time than ﬂoat-point based descriptors because of
the intensity comparison between pairs of sample points and
comparing after creating a binary string. In order to decrease
time complexity, quality of keypoints matched is often compro-
mised. We propose a keypoint descriptor named Morphological
Retina Keypoint Descriptor (MREAK) inspired by the function
of human pupil which dilates and constricts responding to the
amount of light. By using morphological operators of opening and
closing and modifying the retinal sampling pattern accordingly,
an increase in the number of accurately matched keypoints is
observed. Our results show that matched keypoints are more
efﬁcient than FREAK descriptor and requires low computation
time than various descriptors like SIFT, BRISK and SURF.

Index Terms—feature descriptor, human pupil, morphological

operations, keypoint descriptor, image matching

Feature detection is used eminently in image mosaicing,
object recognition, image classiﬁcation and many other com-
puter vision applications for improving the precision of results.
It has always been a challenge to identify feature points
more efﬁciently. A sufﬁcient increase in number of efﬁcient
keypoints leads to a better feature matching which in turn
might improve results in various applications.

Many descriptors have been developed in the last few years.
Lowes SIFT [1] and SURF [2] proposed by Bay et al. are
signiﬁcant examples of the family of Histograms of Oriented
Gradients (HOG) based descriptors. SIFT [1] is rotation and
scale invariant, but it is mathematically complicated and com-
putationally heavy due to calculation of gradients of each pixel
in the patch which makes it less effective for low powered
devices. SURF [2] is an improvement on SIFT [1] as it uses a
box ﬁlter approximation which makes it faster in computation
comparatively. These descriptors are conventional methods
which uses histograms for orientation and hence are irrational
for mobile devices due to high computation time.

In recent times, necessity of applications with low com-
putation time is observed due to massive development in the
ﬁeld of mobile technology. To improve performance, binary
descriptors were introduced. By comparison of intensity in

(a) Original

(b) Opening

images, most of the information of a patch is encoded as a
binary string. The hamming distance is used as a distance
measure between two binary strings which equals the sum
of the XOR operation between the two binary strings which
reduces computational costs and memory requirements. The
Binary Robust Independent Elementary Feature (BRIEF) [3],
the Oriented Fast and Rotated BRIEF (ORB) [4], the Binary
Robust Invariant Scalable Keypoints (BRISK) [5] and the
Fast retina keypoints (FREAK) [6] are good examples. In
the next section, we will brieﬂy present these descriptors. In
order to decrease computation time in mobile applications, the
accuracy of the keypoints detected is ignored. In fact, keypoint
detection and matching is an important concept which plays
a signiﬁcant role in various applications.

In this paper, we propose an alternative binary descriptor
named MREAK (Morphological Retina Keypoint Descriptor)
which is based on the FREAK descriptor and inspired by
the pupillary response that varies the size of the pupil in
human eye, by adjusting image pixel intensity to increase

the number of accurate keypoints and mimic the pupil of
human eye. Morphological operations [8] are used to mimic
the function of human pupil which varies the intensity of
images in speciﬁc areas of an image. Results show that our
proposed method detects new feature points more accurately
and feature matching is improved due to slight changes in
sampling pattern according to required conditions.

II. RELATED WORK

Several computer vision tasks require matching keypoints
across several frames or views. The keypoints need to be
detected ﬁrst. Harris and Stephen in [7] proposed the Harris
corner detector. This detector considers differential of the
corner score into account with reference to direction directly,
and has been proved to be accurate in distinguishing between
edges and corners.

After keypoint detection,

the descriptor is constructed.
Float-point based descriptor and binary descriptor are two
general types of descriptor. Lowe SIFT [1] is a state-of-the-
art descriptor which belongs to ﬂoat-point based category
and generates robust features which are scale and rotation
invariant. A grid is taken around the keypoint and histogram
is generated. Finally, a 128-dimensional vector of gradients
is taken into consideration. This simple descriptor provides
distinctive features, but requires high computational time due
to histogram generation. Another descriptor faster than SIFT
[1] is The Speeded up Robust Feature (SURF) by Bay et al.
[2]. SURF uses BLOB detector based on Hessian matrix to
detect keypoints. Gaussian weights are applied in all directions
for orientation similar as SIFT.

Float-point based descriptor with more accuracy requires
heavy computation time. Due to increasing demand of mobile
applications, a demand of low computation time is noted.
Binary descriptors use haming distance and XOR operation
for matching keypoints and therefore requires less computation
time as compared to ﬂoat-point descriptors. A sampling pattern
is formed around the keypoint and a binary string is computed
by comparing intensity values of sample points. BRIEF [3] is a
binary descriptor in which there is no speciﬁc sampling pattern
or any method for orientation calculation. The sampling pairs
for forming binary strings are randomly selected. Therefore,
BRIEF is less accurate for minute changes in the size or
alignment of an image.

ORB [4] is another example of binary descriptor which has
a random sampling pattern but uses a speciﬁc method for
orientation. Thus, rotation invariance is obtained by calculating
moments of the window around keypoint and considering
the angle of resultant moment. Furthermore, trained sampling
pairs are used which makes it more robust method than BRIEF.
BRISK [5] has a ﬁxed sampling pattern of concentric circles
with increasing points away from the centre. Pairs of points
are divided in two parts. Long pairs are used for orientation
calculation while short pairs are used for forming sampling
pattern which makes it better than BRISK and ORB in terms
of certain photometric changes.

Fig. 2: Human pupil [11]

FREAK [6] is a binary descriptor whose sampling pattern is
inspired by the distribution of ganglion cells in human retina.
The density of points increases moving towards the centre
which mimics the human retina. Predeﬁned pairs determine its
orientation while sampling points uses coarse-to-ﬁne approach
which selects pairs from outer rings followed by pairs from
inner rings. In many aspects, FREAK performs better than
other binary descriptors.

The binary descriptors are computed on keypoints ob-
tained. While in our approach, more accurate keypoints are
detected using morphological operations and sampling pattern
of FREAK is modiﬁed and implemented on keypoints accord-
ingly to get better matches.

III. HUMAN PUPIL

A. Function of pupil

The function of human pupil is to regulate the amount
of light entering human eye. Its shape changes according to
the surrounding environment. In darkness, the pupil dilates
while it constricts in brightness. This phenomenon decides the
amount of light falling on retina as seen in ﬁg. 2 which carries
signals to the brain through the optic nerve. By controlling the
amount of light entering the eye, improvement in its vision is
experienced as the main motive is to view objects clearly in
extreme environments.

In computer vision, efforts have been made to mimic the
human eye to improve the precision of existing algorithms.
In FREAK [6], the sampling pattern was inspired from the
distribution of ganglion cells over the retina of human eye,
which improved the quality of feature points in an image. Our
approach is motivated by this function of pupil of varying the
intensity of light to increase the number of accurate keypoints
detected in an image.

B. Opening and closing

Image restoration is used to improve numerous imperfec-
tions occurring frequently in an image. Morphological image
processing is used to extract
image components such as
boundaries, skeletons, convex hull, etc. This operation can be
used in images which are unclear due to the extreme intensity
of a group of pixels in a speciﬁc part of the image. Dilation
and erosion [8] are operations which are used to expand
and diminish brighter areas of an image respectively. While
opening and closing [8] are modiﬁcations over the previous

while Fig. 3b and Fig. 3c shows sampling pattern of opening
and closing respectively proposed by our method. Radius of
concentric circles and size of receptive ﬁelds are smaller than
that of FREAK as we move towards the centre in opening
pattern and they are bigger in case of closing pattern. After
keypoints are detected in an image, sampling pattern is applied
according to the morphological operation used.

In opening of an image, bright objects are diminished. So,
the opening sampling pattern helps us to identify relevant
information around the keypoint which is more concentrated
towards the centre. While closing of an image expands the
bright objects in an image. Therefore, closing sampling pattern
highlights relevant information which is concentrated slightly
away from the centre.

This change in sampling pattern improves keypoint detec-
tion and constructs a descriptor which enhances the quality of
features around the keypoint. Due to increase in number of
detected keypoints, image matching efﬁciency improves.

B. Orientation

The focus of our approach is to increase the number of
keypoints which leads to better matching. So, for orientation
we use same 45 pairs of points as that of FREAK [6].
This pairs requires less computational memory and time.
Orientation method is same as that of FREAK.

O =

1
M

(cid:88)

P0∈G

(I(P r1

0 ) − I(P r2

0 ))

P r1
0 − P r2
0
||P r1
0 − P r2
0 ||

(1)

Here, M is the total number of pairs used where G is local
0 is the 2D vector of the coordinates of the

gradient and P i
sample points.

Orientation of points is calculated separately for opened and
closed images followed by image matching. By doing this, a
separate set of matched keypoints are obtained for opened and
closed images. The characteristics of orientation are same as
that of FREAK [6].

C. The Descriptor

We compare the intensity values between pairs of receptive
ﬁelds of sample points with their corresponding Gaussian ker-
nel. A binary string B for N pairs is computed by considering
one bit difference of intensities of receptive ﬁelds denoted by
T (Pa).

(cid:88)

B =

2aT (Pa)

0≤a<N

Pa represents a pair of receptive ﬁelds whereas I(P r1
a ) denotes intensities of two ﬁelds in one pair.

I(P r2

a ) and

T (Pa) =

(cid:40)

1
0

a ) > I(P r2

a )),

if (I(P r1
otherwise,

(2)

(3)

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3: Sampling pattern of (a) FREAK [6] and proposed (b)
Opening and (c) Closing

ones. An opening operation is erosion of an image followed
by dilation while closing operation is dilation of an image
followed by erosion.

In our approach, opening and closing operations are per-
formed on an image before detecting the keypoints. This
morphological operations are used in binary images [9]. They
can be used in grayscale images [8] which processes a single-
channel image. In order to use these operations in coloured
image, they are performed in each of the RGB channels. The
structuring element or kernel as mentioned in [8] is used to
determine the extent of impact of these operations. A 3 × 3
rectangular structuring element
is used in our method. A
simple example of opening and closing is shown in Fig. 1.

Kernel =





1
1
1





1 1
1 1
1 1

IV. THE MREAK DESCRIPTOR

A. Sampling pattern

Sampling pattern around the keypoint plays an important
role in matching the keypoints. BRIEF [3] does not have a
speciﬁc sampling pattern while ORB [4] has a random one.
BRISK [5] was the ﬁrst descriptor to use a speciﬁc pattern to
sample its points. FREAK [6] has a sampling pattern which
uses gaussian smoothing over the area around the points and
is inspired by the design of human retina.

Our sampling pattern is modiﬁcation over FREAK by taking
morphological operations [8] like opening and closing into
consideration. Fig. 3a shows the sampling pattern of FREAK

In order to select pairs from many possible combinations,
we use the same algorithm used in FREAK. Following are the
steps :

V. OBSERVED RESULTS

The required results are obtained by implementing it
i3 1.9
in python 3.5 in a Desktop PC with an intel
GHz processor and 8 GB of RAM. Opening and closing
algorithms are implemented followed by description and
matching using our approach by modifying xf eatures2d
in OpenCV 3.3.1 using python 3.5. Then FREAK algo-
rithm is performed to compare results with our approach
by considering three pairs of
images as examples for
evaluating results. Our approach is available on https :
//github.com/himanshuvaghela/opencvcontrib.

Table. I shows computation time of each of the algorithms.
Computation time to detect and match a keypoint
in our
approach is almost similar to that of FREAK. The character-
istics of FREAK are inherited by our approach due to similar
methodology but different sampling pattern.

Consider an example of two photos of Big Ben tower in
London [12] and [13]. Fig. 5a shows 13 best matches of
FREAK [6]. This best matches are determined by ratio of
distances of closest neighbour to second closest as mentioned
in Lowes SIFT [1]. In our case, ratio is greater than 7.5 which
eliminates more than 80 % of false matches. Fig. 5b shows
1498 total keypoint matches of FREAK. Fig. 5c represents
opening of two images and building descriptor using open-
ing sampling pattern where 6 best keypoints are detected.
Fig. 5d represents closing of two images and matching using
closing sampling pattern where 14 best keypoints matches
are detected. In Fig. 5e, both of the opening and closing
keypoints are combined and represented in original images
forming a total of 20 best keypoints. By comparing Fig. 5a
and Fig. 5e, we can infer that extra keypoints are detected and
better matching is done. There are few best matched keypoints
in Fig. 5e which are not there in total FREAK keypoints in
Fig. 5b

In second example, two images of Eiffel tower are consid-
ered [14] and [15]. Fig. 6a shows 21 best FREAK keypoint
matches while Fig. 6e shows 31 total best keypoints using our
approach. In third example, two images of Colosseum [16] and
[17] are considered. Fig. 7a shows 8 best FREAK keypoint
matches while Fig. 7e shows 16 total best keypoints using our
approach.

It is observed that performing morphological operations
like opening and closing on images increases the number
of keypoints and a slight change in sampling pattern over
FREAK improves the quality of keypoint matching providing
a breakthrough in many computer vision applications. So,
efﬁciency of results increases as we mimic the structure of
human eye. This was proved earlier by FREAK and then by
our approach where function of human pupil implemented
through morphological operations eventually improved overall
results.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, a binary descriptor inspired by FREAK
sampling pattern and function of human pupil is presented.
The ﬁeld of computer vision can be further explored by

Fig. 4: Flowchart

1) A descriptor is constructed for each keypoint and it is
arranged in form of a matrix with rows representing key
points and possible pairs represented by columns. The
mean of all columns is calculated.

2) For a unique feature, high variance would be preferable

and it is obtained by mean of 0.5.

3) The columns are arranged accordingly and best column
is selected and rest columns are considered according
to their correlation with the selected columns which is
less.

Our methodology is same as FREAK [6] while only the

sampling pattern being different.

D. Algorithm

Fig. 4.

Our method performs following steps as mentioned in

1) Take images as input and implement morphological
operations of opening and closing separately with kernel
size 3 × 3.

2) Detect the keypoints in this images.
3) Apply the opening and closing sampling pattern around

this keypoints.

4) Match the keypoints obtained resulting in two different

sets of matched keypoints.

5) Combine this keypoints in the original images as shown
in results to get the best set of matched keypoints.
By combining the two sets of keypoints, we get more
number of keypoints in the original set of images which in
turn leads to better matching in many applications of computer
vision.

(a) 13 best FREAK keypoint matches.

(a) 21 best FREAK keypoint
matches.

(b) 1498 total FREAK keypoints.

(b) 3897 total FREAK keypoints.

(c) 6 best keypoints by implementing opening sampling pattern in
opened image.

(c) 11 best keypoints by imple-
menting opening sampling pattern
in opened image.

(d) 14 best keypoints by implementing closing sampling pattern in
closed image.

(d) 20 best keypoints by imple-
menting closing sampling pattern
in closed image.

(e) Combining total 20 best keypoints on original images.

Fig. 5: Implementation on two images of Big Ben tower [12]
and [13]

(e) Combining total 31 best key-
points on original images.

Fig. 6: Implementation on two images of Eiffel tower [14] and
[15]

8

(a)
matches.

best FREAK keypoint

(b) 2027 total FREAK keypoints.

(c) 6 best keypoints by implement-
ing opening sampling pattern in
opened image.

(d) 10 best keypoints by imple-
menting closing sampling pattern
in closed image.

TABLE I: Computation time for 3 pair of images where
approximately 2000 keypoints are detected per image.

Time per keypoint
(ms)
Description time
Matching time

SIFT

SURF

BRISK

FREAK

0.0734
0.3716

0.0631
0.3701

0.0315
0.3788

0.0280
0.1449

OUR
METHOD
0.0286
0.1164

mimicking human eye. The FREAK sampling pattern was
inspired by distribution of ganglion cells in human retina. Our
approach is inspired by the pupillary response of human eye.
New keypoints were detected using this property by imple-
menting selected morphological operations and accordingly
improving the sampling pattern resulting in efﬁcient matching
of keypoints. Moreover, this concept of using morphological
operations for improving the quality of images can be modiﬁed
and used in many methods to improve the accuracy of keypoint
matching and try to reduce computation time even further.

REFERENCES

[1] D. G. Lowe, Distinctive image features from scale invariant keypoints,
Intl Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 60, issue 2, pp. 91-110, 2004.
[2] H. Bay, T. Tuytelaars, and L. Van Gool, Surf: Speeded up robust features,
European Conf. Computer Vision, pages 404417. Springer, 2006.
[3] M. Calonder, V. Lepetit, C. Strecha, and P. Fua., Brief: Binary robust
independent elementary features, In European Conf. Comput. Vision,
pp. 778792, 2010.

[4] E. Rublee, V. Rabaud, K. Konolige, and G. Bradski., Orb:an efﬁcient
alternative to sift or surf, Intl Conf Comput. Vision, pp. 25642571, 2011.
[5] S. Leutenegger, M. Chli, and R. Y. Siegwart., Brisk:Binary robust
invariant scalable keypoints, Intl Conf Com-put. Vision, pp. 25482555,
2011.

[6] A. Alahi, R. Ortiz, and P. Vandergheynst., Freak: Fast retina keypoint,

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.510517, 2012.

[7] C. Harris and M. Stephens. A combined corner and edge detector. In
Alvey vision conference, volume 15, page 50. Manchester, UK, 1988.
[8] J. Gil and R. Kimmel, Efﬁcient dilation, erosion, opening, and closing
algorithms, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
ligence, vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 1606.1617, December 2002.

[9] Raid, A.M and Khedr, W.M and El-dosuky, Mohammed and Aoud,
Mona. (2014). Image Restoration Based on Morphological Operations.
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information
Technology. 4. 9-21. 10.5121/ijcseit.2014.4302.

[10] ﬂickr. [Online]. Available: https : //www.f lickr.com/photos

/bibliodyssey/4981720918/

[11] New York State Optometric Association. [Online]. Available: https : //

www.nysoa.org/uploads/images/

[12] VISIT LONDON. [Online]. Available: https : //cdn.londonandpart

ners.com/visit/london − organisations/big − ben/

[13] KampenOnline. [Online]. Available: https : //kampen.online/wp −

content/uploads/

[14] Behance. [Online]. Available: https : //mir − s3 − cdn − cf.behance

.net/projectmodules/max1200/

[15] Non Stop Destination. [Online]. Available: https : //nonstop
destination.com/wp − content/uploads/2014/11/

[16] Funky Stock. [Online]. Available: https : //f unkystock.photos

[17] Pinterest. [Online]. Available: https : //i.pinimg.com/originals/

helter.com/img/

da/13/7e/

(e) Combining total 16 best key-
points on original images.

Fig. 7: Implementation on two images of Colosseum [16] and
[17]

