7
1
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
2
 
 
]

G
L
.
s
c
[
 
 
2
v
9
1
3
6
0
.
0
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Beat by Beat:
Classifying Cardiac Arrhythmias with Recurrent Neural Networks

Patrick Schwab, Gaetano C Scebba, Jia Zhang, Marco Delai, Walter Karlen

Mobile Health Systems Lab, Department of Health Sciences and Technology
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract

With tens of thousands of electrocardiogram (ECG)
records processed by mobile cardiac event recorders every
day, heart rhythm classiﬁcation algorithms are an impor-
tant tool for the continuous monitoring of patients at risk.
We utilise an annotated dataset of 12,186 single-lead ECG
recordings to build a diverse ensemble of recurrent neu-
ral networks (RNNs) that is able to distinguish between
normal sinus rhythms, atrial ﬁbrillation, other types of ar-
rhythmia and signals that are too noisy to interpret.
In
order to ease learning over the temporal dimension, we in-
troduce a novel task formulation that harnesses the natural
segmentation of ECG signals into heartbeats to drastically
reduce the number of time steps per sequence. Addition-
ally, we extend our RNNs with an attention mechanism that
enables us to reason about which heartbeats our RNNs fo-
cus on to make their decisions. Through the use of atten-
tion, our model maintains a high degree of interpretability,
while also achieving state-of-the-art classiﬁcation perfor-
mance with an average F1 score of 0.79 on an unseen test
set (n=3,658).

1.

Introduction

Cardiac arrhythmias are a heterogenous group of con-
ditions that is characterised by heart rhythms that do not
follow a normal sinus pattern. One of the most com-
mon arrhythmias is atrial ﬁbrillation (AF) with an age-
dependant population prevalence of 2.3 - 3.4% [1]. Due
to the increased mortality associated with arrhythmias, re-
ceiving a timely diagnosis is of paramount importance for
patients [1, 2]. To diagnose cardiac arrhythmias, medical
professionals typically consider a patient’s electrocardio-
gram (ECG) as one of the primary factors [2]. In the past,
clinicians recorded these ECGs mainly using multi-lead
clinical monitors or Holter devices. However, the recent
advent of mobile cardiac event recorders has given patients
the ability to remotely record short ECGs using devices
with a single lead.

We propose a machine-learning approach based on re-
current neural networks (RNNs) to differentiate between
various types of heart rhythms in this more challenging set-
ting with just a single lead and short ECG record lengths.
To ease learning of dependencies over the temporal dimen-
sion, we introduce a novel task formulation that harnesses
the natural beat-wise segmentation of ECG signals. In ad-
dition to utilising several heartbeat features that have been
shown to be highly discriminative in previous works, we
also use stacked denoising autoencoders (SDAE) [3] to
capture differences in morphological structure. Further-
more, we extend our RNNs with a soft attention mech-
anism [4–7] that enables us to reason about which ECG
segments the RNNs prioritise for their decision making.

2.

Methodology

Our cardiac rhythm classiﬁcation pipeline consists of
multiple stages (ﬁgure 1). The core idea of our setup is
to extract a diverse set of features from the sequence of
heartbeats in an ECG record to be used as input features
to an ensemble of RNNs. We blend the individual mod-
els’ predictions into a per-class classiﬁcation score using a
multilayer perceptron (MLP) with a softmax output layer.
The following paragraphs explain the stages shown in ﬁg-
ure 1 in more detail.

ECG Dataset. We use the dataset of the Phys-
ioNet Computing in Cardiology (CinC) 2017 challenge [8]
which contains 12,186 unique single-lead ECG records of
varying length. Experts annotated each of these ECGs
as being either a normal sinus rhythm, AF, an other ar-

ECG

Preprocessing

Features

Level 1
Models

Level 2
Blender

Classiﬁcation

Normalise

Segment

...

Blend

Extract
Features

Model1

Modeln

Normal
AF
Other
Noise

Figure 1. An overview of our ECG classiﬁcation pipeline.

rhythmia or too noisy to classify. The challenge organisers
keep 3,658 (30%) of these ECG records private as a test
set. Additionally, we hold out a non-stratiﬁed random sub-
set of 20% of the public dataset as a validation set. For
some RNN conﬁgurations, we further augment the train-
ing data with labelled samples extracted from other Phy-
sioNet databases [9–12] in order to even out misbalanced
class sizes in the training set. As an additional measure
against the imbalanced class distribution of the dataset, we
weight each training sample’s contribution to the loss func-
tion to be inversely proportional to its class’ prevalence in
the overall dataset.

Normalisation. Prior to segmentation, we normalise the
ECG recording to have a mean value of zero and a standard
deviation of one. We do not apply any additional ﬁlters as
all ECGs were bandpass-ﬁltered by the recording device.

Segmentation. Following normalisation, we segment
the ECG into a sequence of heartbeats. We decide to re-
formulate the given task of classifying arrhythmias as a se-
quence classiﬁcation task over heartbeats rather than over
raw ECG readings. The motivation behind the reformula-
tion is that it signiﬁcantly reduces the number of time steps
through which the error signal of our RNNs has to prop-
agate. On the training set, the reformulation reduces the
mean number of time steps per ECG from 9000 to just 33.
To perform the segmentation, we use a customised QRS
detector based on Pan-Tompkin’s [13] that identiﬁes R-
peaks in the ECG recording. We extend their algorithm by
adapting the threshold with a moving average of the ECG
signal to be more resilient against the commonly encoun-
tered short bursts of noise. For the purpose of this work,
we deﬁne heartbeats using a symmetric ﬁxed size window
with a total length of 0.66 seconds around R-peaks. We
pass the extracted heartbeat sequence in its original order
to the feature extraction stage.

Feature Extraction. We extract a diverse set of features
from each heartbeat in an ECG recording. Speciﬁcally, we
extract the time since the last heartbeat (δRR), the relative
wavelet energy (RWE) over ﬁve frequency bands, the to-
tal wavelet energy (TWE) over those frequency bands, the
R amplitude, the Q amplitude, QRS duration and wavelet
entropy (WE). Previous works demonstrated the efﬁcacy
of all of these features in discriminating cardiac arrhyth-
mias from normal heart rhythms [14–18]. In addition to
the aforementioned features, we also train two SDAEs on
the heartbeats in an unsupervised manner with the goal of
learning more nuanced differences in morphology of in-
dividual heartbeats. We train one SDAE on the extracted
heartbeats of the training set and the other on their wavelet
coefﬁcients. We then use the encoding side of the SDAEs
to extract low-dimensional embeddings of each heartbeat
and each heartbeat’s wavelet coefﬁcients to be used as ad-
ditional input features. Finally, we concatenate all ex-

tracted features into a single feature vector per heartbeat
and pass them to the level 1 models in original heartbeat
sequence order.

Level 1 Models. We build an ensemble of level 1 mod-
els to classify the sequence of per-beat feature vectors. To
increase the diversity within our ensemble, we train RNNs
in various binary classiﬁcation settings and with different
hyperparameters. We use RNNs with 1 - 5 recurrent layers
that consist of either Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) [19] or
Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (BLSTM) units
[20], followed by an optional attention layer, 1 - 2 forward
layers and a softmax output layer. Additionally, we infer a
nonparametric Hidden Semi-Markov Model (HSMM) [21]
with 64 initial states for each class in an unsupervised set-
ting. In total, our ensemble of level 1 models consists of
15 RNNs and 4 HSMMs. We concatenate the ECG’s nor-
malised log-likelihoods under the per-class HSMMs and
the RNNs’ softmax outputs into a single prediction vector.
We pass the prediction vector of the level 1 models to the
level 2 blender model.

Level 2 Blender. We use blending [22] to combine the
predictions of our level 1 models and a set of ECG-wide
features into a ﬁnal per-class classiﬁcation score. The ad-
ditional features are the RWE and WE over the whole ECG
and the absolute average deviation (AAD) of the WE and
δRR of all beats. We employ a MLP with a softmax out-
put layer as our level 2 blender model. In order to avoid
overﬁtting to the training set, we train the MLP on the val-
idation set.

Hyperparameter Selection. To select the hyperparam-
eters of our level 1 RNNs, we performed a grid search on
the range of 0 - 75% for the dropout and recurrent dropout
percentages, 60 - 512 for the number of units per hidden
layer and 1 - 5 for the number of recurrent layers. We
found that RNNs trained with 35% dropout, 65% recur-
rent dropout, 80 units per hidden layer and 5 recurrent lay-
ers (plus an additional attention layer) achieve consistently
strong results across multiple binary classiﬁcation settings.
For our level 2 blender model, we utilise Bayesian optimi-
sation [23] to select the number of layers, number of hid-
den units per layer, dropout and number of training epochs.
We perform a 5-fold cross validation on the validation set
to select the blender model’s hyperparameters.

2.1.

Attention over Heartbeats

Attention mechanisms have been shown to allow for
greater interpretability of neural networks in a variety of
tasks in computer vision and natural language process-
ing [4–7]. In this work, we apply soft attention over the
heartbeats contained in ECG signals in order to gain a
deeper understanding of the decision-making process of
our RNNs. Consider the case of an RNN that is processing
a sequence of T heartbeats. The topmost recurrent layer

Normal vs. all

Normal: 94 % 

Other vs. all

   Other: 67 % 

at

G
C
E

(s)

(s)

Figure 2. A visualisation of the attention values at (top) of two different RNNs over two sample ECG recordings (bottom).
The graphs on top of the ECG recordings show the attention values at associated with each identiﬁed heartbeat (dashed
line). The labels in the left and right corners of the attention value graphs show the settings the model was trained for and
their classiﬁcation conﬁdence, respectively. The recording on the left (A02149) represents a normal sinus rhythm. Due to
the regular heart rhythm in the ECG, a distinctive pattern of approximately equally weighted attention on each heartbeat
emerges from our RNN that was trained to distinguish between normal sinus rhythms and all other types of rhythms. The
recording on the right (A04661) is labelled as an other arrhythmia. The RNN trained to identify other arrhythmias focuses
primarily on a sudden, elongated pause in the heart rhythm to decide that the record is most likely an other arrhythmia.

outputs a hidden state ht at every time step t ∈ [1, T ] of
the sequence. We extend some of our RNNs with additive
soft attention over the hidden states ht to obtain a context
vector c that attenuates the most informative hidden states
ht of a heartbeat sequence. Based on the deﬁnition in [6],
we use the following set of equations:

ut = tanh(Wbeatht + bbeat)
at = sof tmax(uT

t ubeat)

c = X
t

atht

(1)

(2)

(3)

Where equation (1) is a single-layer MLP with a weight
matrix Wbeat and bias bbeat to obtain ut as a hidden rep-
resentation of ht [6]. In equation (2), we calculate the at-
tention factors at for each heartbeat by computing a soft-
max over the dot-product similarities of every heartbeat’s
ut to the heartbeat context vector ubeat. ubeat corresponds
to a hidden representation of the most informative heart-
beat [6]. We jointly optimise Wbeat, bbeat and ubeat with
the other RNN parameters during training. In ﬁgure 2, we
showcase two examples of how qualitative analysis of the
attention factors at of equation (2) provides a deeper un-
derstanding of our RNNs’ decision making.

3.

Related Work

Our work builds on a long history of research in detect-
ing cardiac arrhythmias from ECG records by making use
of features that have been shown to be highly discrimi-
native in distinguishing certain arrhythmias from normal
heart rhythms [14–18]. Recently, Rajpurkar et al. pro-
posed a 34-layer convolutional neural network (CNN) to
reach cardiologist-level performance in classifying a large
set of arrhythmias from mobile cardiac event recorder data

[24]. In contrast, we achieve state-of-the-art performance
with signiﬁcantly fewer trainable parameters by harnessing
the natural heartbeat segmentation of ECGs and discrim-
inative features from previous works. Additionally, we
pay consideration to the fact that interpretability remains
a challenge in applying machine learning to the medical
domain [25] by extending our models with an attention
mechanism that enables medical professionals to reason
about which heartbeats contributed most to the decision-
making process of our RNNs.

4.

Results and Conclusion

We present a machine-learning approach to distinguish-
ing between multiple types of heart rhythms. Our approach
utilises an ensemble of RNNs to jointly identify temporal
and morphological patterns in segmented ECG recordings
of any length. In detail, our approach reaches an average
F1 score of 0.79 on the private test set of the PhysioNet
CinC Challenge 2017 (n = 3, 658) with class-wise F1
scores of 0.90, 0.79 and 0.68 for normal rhythms, AF and
other arrhythmias, respectively. On top of its state-of-the-
art performance, our approach maintains a high degree of
interpretability through the use of a soft attention mech-
anism over heartbeats. In the spirit of open research, we
make an implementation of our cardiac rhythm classiﬁca-
tion system available through the PhysioNet 2017 Open
Source Challenge.

Future Work. Based on our discussions with a car-
diologist, we hypothesise that the accuracy of our mod-
els could be further improved by incorporating contextual
information, such as demographic information, data from
other clinical assessments and behavioral aspects.

Acknowledgements

This work was partially funded by the Swiss National
Science Foundation (SNSF) project No. 167302 within
the National Research Program (NRP) 75 “Big Data” and
SNSF project No. 150640. We thank Prof. Dr. med. Fi-
rat Duru for providing valuable insights into the decision-
making process of cardiologists.

References

[1] Ball J, Carrington MJ, McMurray JJ, Stewart S. Atrial ﬁb-
rillation: Proﬁle and burden of an evolving epidemic in
the 21st century. International Journal of Cardiology 2013;
167(5):1807–1824.

[2] Camm AJ, Kirchhof P, Lip GY, Schotten U, Savelieva I,
Ernst S, Van Gelder IC, Al-Attar N, Hindricks G, Prender-
gast B, et al. Guidelines for the management of atrial ﬁbril-
lation. European Heart Journal 2010;31:2369–2429.
[3] Vincent P, Larochelle H, Lajoie I, Bengio Y, Manzagol
PA.
Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful
representations in a deep network with a local denoising
criterion.
Journal of Machine Learning Research 2010;
11(Dec):3371–3408.

[4] Bahdanau D, Cho K, Bengio Y. Neural machine translation
by jointly learning to align and translate. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.

[5] Xu K, Ba J, Kiros R, Cho K, Courville A, Salakhudinov R,
Zemel R, Bengio Y. Show, attend and tell: Neural image
caption generation with visual attention.
In International
Conference on Machine Learning. 2015; 2048–2057.
[6] Yang Z, Yang D, Dyer C, He X, Smola AJ, Hovy EH. Hi-
erarchical attention networks for document classiﬁcation.
In Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies. 2016; 1480–1489.

[7] Zhang Z, Xie Y, Xing F, McGough M, Yang L. MD-
Net: A Semantically and Visually Interpretable Medical
Image Diagnosis Network. In International Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.02485, 2017.

[8] Clifford GD, Liu CY, Moody B, Lehman L, Silva I, Li Q,
Johnson AEW, Mark RG. AF classiﬁcation from a short
single lead ECG recording: The Physionet Computing in
Cardiology Challenge 2017. In Computing in Cardiology,
2017.

[9] Goldberger AL, Amaral LAN, Glass L, Hausdorff JM,
Ivanov PC, Mark RG, Mietus JE, Moody GB, Peng CK,
Stanley HE. PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet:
Components of a New Research Resource for Complex
Physiologic Signals. Circulation 2000;101(23):e215–e220.
[10] Moody GB, Mark RG. The impact of the MIT-BIH arrhyth-
mia database. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Magazine 2001;20(3):45–50.

[11] Moody G. A new method for detecting atrial ﬁbrillation us-
ing RR intervals. In Computers in Cardiology. IEEE, 1983;
227–230.

[12] Greenwald SD, Patil RS, Mark RG. Improved detection and
classiﬁcation of arrhythmias in noise-corrupted electrocar-
diograms using contextual information.
In Computers in
Cardiology. IEEE, 1990; 461–464.

[13] Pan J, Tompkins WJ. A real-time QRS detection algo-
rithm. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 1985;
3:230–236.

[14] Sarkar S, Ritscher D, Mehra R. A detector for a chronic
implantable atrial tachyarrhythmia monitor. IEEE Transac-
tions on Biomedical Engineering 2008;55(3):1219–1224.

[15] Tateno K, Glass L. Automatic detection of atrial ﬁbrillation
using the coefﬁcient of variation and density histograms of
RR and δRR intervals. Medical and Biological Engineering
and Computing 2001;39(6):664–671.

[16] Garc´ıa M, R´odenas J, Alcaraz R, Rieta JJ. Application of
the relative wavelet energy to heart rate independent detec-
tion of atrial ﬁbrillation. computer methods and programs
in biomedicine 2016;131:157–168.

[17] R´odenas J, Garc´ıa M, Alcaraz R, Rieta JJ. Wavelet entropy
automatically detects episodes of atrial ﬁbrillation from
single-lead electrocardiograms. Entropy 2015;17(9):6179–
6199.

[18] Alcaraz R, Vay´a C, Cervig´on R, S´anchez C, Rieta J.
Wavelet sample entropy: A new approach to predict ter-
mination of atrial ﬁbrillation. In Computers in Cardiology.
IEEE, 2006; 597–600.

[19] Chung J, Gulcehre C, Cho K, Bengio Y. Empirical evalua-
tion of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence model-
ing. In Neural Information Processing Systems, Workshop
on Deep Learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.
[20] Graves A, Jaitly N, Mohamed Ar. Hybrid speech recog-
nition with deep bidirectional lstm. In Automatic Speech
Recognition and Understanding, IEEE Workshop on. IEEE,
2013; 273–278.

[21] Johnson MJ, Willsky AS. Bayesian nonparametric hidden
Journal of Machine Learning Re-

semi-markov models.
search 2013;14(Feb):673–701.

[22] Wolpert DH. Stacked generalization. Neural networks

1992;5(2):241–259.

[23] Bergstra J, Yamins D, Cox DD. Hyperopt: A python library
for optimizing the hyperparameters of machine learning al-
In Proceedings of the 12th Python in Science
gorithms.
Conference. 2013; 13–20.

[24] Rajpurkar P, Hannun AY, Haghpanahi M, Bourn C, Ng AY.
Cardiologist-level arrhythmia detection with convolutional
neural networks. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1707.01836, 2017.
[25] Cabitza F, Rasoini R, Gensini G. Unintended consequences
of machine learning in medicine. Journal of the American
Medical Association 2017;318(6):517–518.

Address for correspondence:

Patrick Schwab, ETH Zurich
Balgrist Campus, BAA D, Lengghalde 5, 8092 Zurich
patrick.schwab@hest.ethz.ch

