Multi-view Graph Embedding with Hub Detection
for Brain Network Analysis

Guixiang Ma∗, Chun-Ta Lu∗, Lifang He‡, Philip S. Yu¶,∗, Ann B. Ragin†
∗University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
¶Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
‡Department of Healthcare Policy and Research, Cornell University
†Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
{gma4, clu29, psyu}@uic.edu, lifanghescut@gmail.com, ann-ragin@northwestern.edu

7
1
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
2
1
 
 
]

G
L
.
s
c
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
6
3
0
.
9
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Multi-view graph embedding has become a widely
studied problem in the area of graph learning. Most of the
existing works on multi-view graph embedding aim to ﬁnd a
shared common node embedding across all the views of the graph
by combining the different views in a speciﬁc way. Hub detection,
as another essential topic in graph mining has also drawn
extensive attentions in recent years, especially in the context
of brain network analysis. Both the graph embedding and hub
detection relate to the node clustering structure of graphs. The
multi-view graph embedding usually implies the node clustering
structure of the graph based on the multiple views, while the
hubs are the boundary-spanning nodes across different node
clusters in the graph and thus may potentially inﬂuence the
clustering structure of the graph. However, none of the existing
works in multi-view graph embedding considered the hubs when
learning the multi-view embeddings. In this paper, we propose
to incorporate the hub detection task into the multi-view graph
embedding framework so that the two tasks could beneﬁt each
other. Speciﬁcally, we propose an auto-weighted framework of
Multi-view Graph Embedding with Hub Detection (MVGE-HD)
for brain network analysis. The MVGE-HD framework learns
a uniﬁed graph embedding across all the views while reducing
the potential inﬂuence of the hubs on blurring the boundaries
between node clusters in the graph, thus leading to a clear
and discriminative node clustering structure for the graph. We
apply MVGE-HD on two real multi-view brain network datasets
(i.e., HIV and Bipolar). The experimental results demonstrate
the superior performance of the proposed framework in brain
network analysis for clinical investigation and application.

I. INTRODUCTION
Recent years have witnessed an explosion of data in the
form of graph representations. These data comes with a set
of nodes and links between the nodes, for example the social
networks with nodes representing users and links representing
relationships among the users, and the brain networks with
brain regions as nodes and the correlations among different
regions as links. With the advanced capabilities for data
acquisition, the links can usually be constructed from multiple
sources or views of the data, which is usually called multi-
view graph data. For instance, brain networks can be derived
from fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) and DTI
(diffusion tensor imaging), which are two major neuroimaging
techniques for brain data acquisition in neuroscience research
and clinical applications. The fMRI brain networks reﬂect the
correlations of different brain regions in functional activity,
while the DTI networks encode the information of structural

connections (i.e. white matter ﬁber paths) between different
brain regions. Thus these two kinds of networks can serve as
two views of the connectivity for brain network data [1].

Multi-view graph embedding, as a hot topic in multi-view
graph learning, has drawn extensive attentions in the past
decade. Most of the existing works in multi-view graph em-
bedding aim to combine the information from all the views and
obtain a lower dimensional but better feature representation of
the nodes for the spectral clustering problem. For example, in
[2], a co-regularized multi-view spectral clustering method is
proposed to ﬁnd a consistent clustering across the multiple
views. In [3], two solutions based on minimum description
length and tensor decomposition principles are proposed for
graph clustering across multiple views. A multi-modal spectral
clustering algorithm is presented in [4] to learn a commonly
shared graph Laplacian matrix by unifying different views.
In [5], an afﬁnity aggregation spectral clustering algorithm is
proposed, which seeks for an optimal combination of afﬁnity
matrices for the spectral clustering across multiple views. In
[6], a large-scale multi-view spectral clustering approach is
proposed using local manifold fusion to integrate heteroge-
neous features of graphs.

Although these works introduced above can be used to
obtain the graph embeddings from multiple views, none of
them has considered the hubs when learning the multi-view
graph embedding, making them less capable for the scenarios
where hubs are also important for the clustering of nodes in
graphs. The “hubs” refer to the bridging nodes that connect
to different groups of nodes in a graph. For example, in a
brain network, the hubs help bridge different groups of brain
regions [7], while in a social network, the hubs are known as
“structural hole spanners” [8], which refer to the users bridging
different communities. The hubs in both of the two scenarios
can potentially inﬂuence the node clustering structure of the
network, as they are the boundary-spanning nodes across
different clusters and their neighbors usually spread out in
different clusters. Therefore, hubs should be taken into ac-
count in the multi-view graph embedding learning process for
achieving a clear and discriminative node clustering structure
for the graph. Speciﬁcally, in neuroscience studies, the hubs
of brain networks have been proven to be more biologically
costly due to higher blood ﬂow or connection distances, thus

they tend to be more vulnerable to brain injuries [9]. As a
result, the hubs will differ in the brain networks of normal
people and those of the subjects with neurological disorder,
which means the corresponding brain network embeddings
of normal people and disordered subjects also tend to be
different. Therefore,
if we could consider the hubs when
learning multi-view graph embeddings of brain networks, the
resulted embeddings will be useful for distinguishing brain
disordered subjects from normal controls.

In this paper, we focus on jointly learning the multi-view
graph embeddings and hubs for brain network analysis. There
are three main challenges that must be addressed for this
problem:

• As the task of multi-view graph embedding and the task
of multi-view hub detection are naturally twisted, how to
provide a joint learning framework such that both tasks
can be solved at the same time and help improve the
overall performance.

• It is often assumed that each individual view captures the
partial information but they all admit the same underlying
structure of the data. How to leverage the multi-view
graph data for obtaining a good uniﬁed graph embedding
across all the views?

• How to decide the importance of each view of the data
when combining them for the multi-view learning task?
To address the above challenges, we propose an auto-
weighted multi-view graph embedding with hub detection
(MVGE-HD) framework. Our contributions can be summa-
rized as follows:

• To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to
solve the problem of multi-view graph embedding with
hub detection.

• The proposed MVGE-HD framework can jointly learn
the multi-view graph embeddings and identify the hubs,
instead of separating them into different steps. By con-
sidering the hubs, the obtained embeddings will reﬂect a
clearer node clustering structure of the graph, which can
better facilitate the further analysis of the graph.

• Our framework can automatically tune the importance
of each view for the multi-view graph embedding with
hub detection, avoiding the problem that might be caused
otherwise by different parameter settings and thus having
good generalization ability.

• We apply the MVGE-HD framework on two real brain
network datasets (HIV and Bipolar) to investigate the
multi-view brain region clustering structure and the hubs
in brain networks for neurological disorder analysis, as
a topic discussed for the ﬁrst time in the literature of
neuroscience study as well. The experimental results
show the effectiveness of MVGE-HD for multi-view
brain network analysis.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The problem
formulation and some preliminary knowledge are given in the
next section. Then we present the details of the proposed
MVGE-HD framework in Section III and IV. The experimental

Fig. 1. An brain network example with four modules and ﬁve hubs

results and analysis are shown in Section V. Related works are
discussed in Section VI and the conclusions in Section VII.

II. PRELIMINARIES

In this section, we introduce some notations and terminolo-
gies that we will use in this paper. Then we establish some
deﬁnitions and formulate the problem formally.

Notations. Vectors are denoted by boldface lowercase let-
ters, and matrices are denoted by boldface capital letters. An
element of a vector x is denoted by xi, and an element of a ma-
trix X is denoted by xij. For a matrix X ∈ Rn×m, its i-th row
and j-th column are denoted by xi and xj, respectively. The
Frobenius norm of X is deﬁned as (cid:107)X(cid:107)F = (cid:112)(cid:80)n
i=1 (cid:107)xi(cid:107)2
2,
(cid:13)mi(cid:13)
(cid:13)
and the (cid:96)2,1 norm of M is deﬁned as (cid:107)M(cid:107)2,1 = (cid:80)n
(cid:13)2.
i=1
For any vector x ∈ Rn, Diag(x) ∈ Rn×n is the diagonal
matrix whose diagonal elements are xi. In denotes an identity
matrix with size n. We denote an undirected graph with m
views as G = (V, E(1), E(2), · · · , E(m)), where V is the set
of nodes and E(i) ⊂ V × V is the set of edges from view i of
G. We denote the afﬁnity matrices of the multi-view graph G
by A = {A(1), A(2), · · · , A(m)}, where A(i) ∈ Rn×n is the
weighted afﬁnity matrix in view i, and its entry denotes the
pairwise afﬁnity between nodes of G in view i.

We assume F ∈ Rn×k is an embedding of G, and then
the i-th row vector of F (i.e., f i) represents the embedding
of node i. We call k the dimension of the embedding F. If
we run k-means algorithm on the set of row vectors of F
and set the number of clusters as k, we will get a clustering
assignment of the n nodes into k clusters. Thus an embedding
of a graph usually implies its node clustering structure. We
assume the k clusters are represented by C = {C1, · · · , Ck},
with V = C1 ∪ · · · ∪ Ck and Ci ∩ Cj = ∅ for every pair i, j
with i (cid:54)= j. Based on these assumptions, we give the following
deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 1. (Internal Node) For any node vi ∈ Cx, if all
the nodes that vi have connections with belong to the same
cluster Cx, node vi is called an internal node.
Deﬁnition 2. (Hub) For any node vi ∈ Cx, if there exists
some neighboring node vj ∈ Cy(x (cid:54)= y), node vi is called a
hub.

Deﬁnition 3. (Cross Edge) For any edge eij = (vi, vj) ∈ E,
if vi ∈ Cx and vj ∈ Cy(x (cid:54)= y), edge eij is called a cross
edge.

in brain networks,

Fig. 1 shows an example of a brain network with four
modules and ﬁve hubs. Note that
the
clusters of brain regions are often called “modules”. In some
works of brain hub analysis, the hubs shown in Fig. 1 are
called “connector hubs” while another kind of hubs are called
“provincial hubs” [7], which refer to the internal node with
high centrality within a module. In this paper, the hubs we
considered are the “connector hubs” stated in those works.

III. METHODOLOGY

In this section, we ﬁrst present

the proposed approach
for multi-view graph embedding with hub detection. Then
we derive the auto-weighted framework for the proposed
approach.

A. Multi-view Graph Embedding with Hub Detection

Graph embedding, as an important tool in topological graph
theory, has been widely studied for graph data analysis [10]–
[12]. In the literature of graph embedding, hubs are seldom
considered along with the embedding learning. However, in
many graph learning scenarios, hubs play an important role
for node clustering or graph embedding analysis. As shown in
Figure 1, the hubs are those boundary-spanning nodes across
different clusters in the graph, and their neighbors naturally
occur in different clusters, and thus the hubs may blur the
boundary between clusters. If we want
to obtain a graph
embedding that can encode a clear node clustering structure,
it is crucial to enable the graph embedding approach to have
the discriminative ability for such boundary-spanning nodes,
i.e., the hubs, and thus encoding only characterizing internal
the (cid:96)2,1-norm
nodes in the graph. To solve this problem,
penalty is introduced to the context of node clustering and
has been proven to be an effective strategy for dealing with
the boundary-spanning nodes and improving the node cluster-
ing [8], [13]. In this paper, we employ the similar strategy and
incorporate it into our multi-view graph embedding and hub
detection framework.

To derive our multi-view framework, we ﬁrst formulate the
problem of single-view graph embedding with hub detection.
Given the afﬁnity matrix A(v) and the diagonal matrix D(v)
with d(v)ii = (cid:80)n
j=1 aij for view v of the graph G, we intend to
obtain a graph embedding F(v) ∈ Rn×k. Based on the analysis
in [13], the value of f i
(v) at node vi can be formulated as the
weighted average of f i
(v) at neighbors of vi, where the weights
are proportional to the edge weights in adjacency matrix A(v),
thus we can have the following objective function

(cid:13)
(cid:13)F(v) − D−1
(cid:13)

(v)A(v)F(v)

(cid:13)
2
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

F

min
F(v)

(1)

As discussed above, we need to make the embedding matrix
F(v) have discriminative ability for the hubs for inducing a
clearer node clustering structure of G. Based on [8] and [13],
we apply the (cid:96)2,1-norm penalty and orthogonality constraints

to promote the row-wise sparsity, so as to discriminate the
hubs and encode only characterizing internal nodes. Then the
problem of graph embedding with hub detection on single
view becomes

(cid:13)
(cid:13)F(v) − D−1
(cid:13)

(v)A(v)F(v)

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)2,1

min
F(v)

s.t. FT

(v)F(v) = Ik

For the multi-view graph learning task, we consider com-
bining the information from the multiple views of graph
G and obtaining a uniﬁed graph embedding across all the
views, which can better encode the embedding structure while
considering the multi-view hubs as well. To achieve this goal,
we propose to use the weighted combination of the graph
embedding from each view, and we formulate it as follows.

We assume the uniﬁed embedding matrix across all the
views of graph G is represented by F ∈ Rn×k, where k
is the dimension of the row vectors. Then the multi-view
graph embedding with hub detection can be formulated as the
following problem

min
F

m
(cid:88)

v=1

α(v)

(cid:13)
(cid:13)F − D−1
(cid:13)

(v)A(v)F

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)2,1

s.t. FTF = Ik

(2)

(3)

where α(v) is the weight parameter for view v. Note that here
the value of the weight parameter α(v) is decided by an auto-
tuning procedure, which will be introduced later in Section
III-B.

As the above minimization problem involving (cid:96)2,1 norm is
nontrivial to solve directly, we further derive Eq. (3) based on
the following lemma [14].

Lemma 1. Let φ(.) be a function satisfying the conditions:
x) is convex on R+;
x → φ(x) is convex on R; x → φ(
φ(x) = φ(−x), ∀x ∈ R; φ(x) is C 1 on R; φ(cid:48)(cid:48)(0+) ≥ 0,
φ(x)/x2 = 0. Then for a ﬁxed (cid:107)ui(cid:107)2, there exists a dual
lim
x→∞
potential function ϕ(.), such that

√

φ((cid:107)ui(cid:107)2) = inf
p∈R

{p(cid:107)ui(cid:107)2

2 + ϕ(p)}

(4)

where p is determined by the minimizer function ϕ(.) with
respect to φ(.).

Let P(v) = F − D−1

(v)A(v)F. According to the analysis
x2 + (cid:15), we
for the (cid:96)2,1 norm in [14], if we deﬁne φ(x) =
can replace (cid:107)P(v)(cid:107)2,1 with (cid:80)n
(v)(cid:107)2). Thus, based on
Lemma 1, we reformulate the objective function of Eq. (3) as
follows:

j=1 φ((cid:107)pj

√

(cid:16)

α(v)Tr

PT

(v)Q(v)P(v)

(cid:17)

min
F

m
(cid:88)

v=1

s.t. FTF = Ik

(5)

where Q(v) = Diag(q(v)), and q(v) is an auxiliary vector of
the (cid:96)2,1 norm. The elements of q(v) are computed by q(v)j =
, where (cid:15) is a smoothing term and is usually set
(cid:113)

2
to be a small constant value (we set (cid:15) = 10−4 in this paper).

1
(cid:107)pj
(v)(cid:107)2

2+(cid:15)

Plugging P(v) = F − D−1

(v)A(v)F into Eq. (5), we can have

the full form of the objective function with respect to F as

Algorithm 1 MVGE-HD
Input: Afﬁnity matrices

α(v)Tr (cid:0)FTL(v)F(cid:1)

min
F

m
(cid:88)

v=1

s.t. FTF = Ik

where L(v) =

In − D−1

(v)A(v)

Q(v)

In − D−1

(v)A(v)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)T

(cid:16)

B. An Auto-weighted Framework: MVGE-HD

In the literature of multi-view graph learning, adding a
weight parameter for each view tend to be a common way
for balancing the inﬂuence of different views of the data, and
the choice of the parameter values is usually crucial to the
ﬁnal performance [6], [15], [16]. The optimal parameter value
tends to change for different datasets. Therefore, it is critical to
avoid this problem and make the multi-view graph embedding
approach more general to be applied to different datasets.
Inspired by the auto-weighted multiple graph learning strategy
proposed in [17], we further derive our objective function and
propose an auto-weighted framework called MVGE-HD as
follows.

Following Eq. (6), we assume there is no weight parameters
explicitly deﬁned for each view, and we take the following
form for the general framework

Tr (cid:0)FTL(v)F(cid:1)

min
F

m
(cid:88)

(cid:113)

v=1

s.t. FTF = Ik

(7)

(8)

The Lagrange function of Eq. (7) can be written as

min
F

m
(cid:88)

(cid:113)

v=1

Tr (cid:0)FTL(v)F(cid:1) + G (Λ, F)

where λ is the Lagrange multiplier, and G(Λ, F) represents
the Lagrange term derived from the constraint.

Then we take the derivative of Eq. (8) with respect to F

and set the derivative to be zero. We will have

min
F

m
(cid:88)

v=1

α(v)

∂Tr (cid:0)FTL(v)F(cid:1)
∂F

+

∂G (Λ, F)
∂F

= 0

(9)

where

α(v) =

1
Tr (cid:0)FTL(v)F(cid:1)

(cid:113)
2

We can easily ﬁnd that Eq. (9) can be regarded as the
solution to the problem in Eq. (6) if α(v)
is set with a
stationary value. However, as shown in Eq. (10), the value
of α(v) depends on the variable F. To solve this problem, we
employ the alternating optimization scheme to update F and
α(v) alternately in an iterative manner. Given an initialized
F, we can compute the value for α(v), according to Eq. (10).
Then the new α(v) will be used consecutively to update F by
solving Eq. (6), so on and so forth until convergence. After
this iterative optimization process, we will obtain both the

{A(1), A(2), · · · , A(m)};
embedding k

for m views A
the dimension of

=
the graph

(6)

(cid:17)

.

Output: The graph embedding matrix F,
1: Initialize F0 s.t. FT
2: while not converge do
3:

0 F0 = Ik, t ← 0;

4:

5:

Compute α(v)t for v = 1, · · · , m by Eq. (10);
1
Set Q(v)t ← Diag(
(cid:113)
(cid:107)pj
(v)(cid:107)2
Compute Ft+1 by calculating the eigenvectors corre-
sponding to the 2nd to (k + 1)-th smallest eigenvalues of
matrix (cid:101)L in Eq. (11);

2+(cid:15)

);

2

t ← t + 1;

6:
7: end while

learned weight α(v) and the multi-view graph embedding F
for Eq. (6), which is the real problem we aim to solve.

In the above multi-view graph embedding problem, if view
v can provide much useful information, we say it is a good
view, and the value of Tr(FTL(v)F) should be small. Based
the weight α(v) will be large. Accordingly,
on Eq. (10),
a bad view will have a small weight. This indicates that
the optimization scheme of the weights in our framework is
reasonable.

Based on the above analysis, we can ﬁnd that the proposed
MVGE-HD framework can learn the multi-view graph embed-
ding with hubs and the weight of each view simultaneously,
thus can serve as a general framework for learning multi-
view graph embedding on various datasets. The details of
the optimization process and the convergence analysis of the
framework will be introduced later in Section IV.

IV. OPTIMIZATION

Following the analysis in Section III, we present the iterative
optimization process of MVGE-HD in this section. We start
with the initialization of weight factor α(v) for each view v,
and set them to be 1
m equally. Now we compute F by solving
the minimization problem (6). If we treat the (cid:80)m
v=1 α(v)L(v)
in Eq. (6) as a Laplacian matrix (cid:101)L, based on the spectral
analysis in [18], the optimal F can be computed by solving
the eigenvector problem of the matrix

(10)

m
(cid:88)

v=1

(cid:101)L =

α(v)

In − D−1

(v)A(v)

Q(v)

In − D−1

(v)A(v)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)T

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(11)

Note that according to the illustration in Section III-A, the
diagonal matrix Q(v) is dependent on F. Therefore we need
to compute Q(v) ﬁrst following its deﬁnition in Section III-A
before updating F. After we obtain the updated F, we can use
it to compute the weight factor α(v) by Eq. (10) for the next
iteration, which will be used to compute F again following
the same process discussed above. We summarize the overall
optimization algorithm in Algorithm 1.

Based on the analysis in [17], it is obvious that the solution
in Algorithm 1 will converge to a local optimum of the
problem (7), as the updated F in each iteration of Algorithm 1
monotonically decrease the objective function in Eq. (7). For
details about the theorem and proof, users can refer to the
illustrations in [17].

V. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS

A. Data Collection and Preprocessing

In this work, we use two real datasets as follows:
• Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus Infection (HIV): This
dataset is collected from the Chicago Early HIV Infection
Study at Northwestern University [19]. This clinical study
involves 77 subjects, 56 of which are early HIV patients
(positive) and the other 21 subjects are seronegative
controls (negative). These two groups of subjects do
not differ in demographic characteristics such as age,
gender, racial composition and education level. This
dataset contains both the functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) for
each subject, from which we can construct the fMRI and
DTI brain networks. Then we can treat them as graphs
with two views.

• Bipolar: This dataset consists of the fMRI and DTI image
data of 52 bipolar I subjects who are in euthymia and
45 healthy controls with matched age and gender. The
resting-state fMRI scan was acquired on a 3T Siemens
Trio scanner using a T2*-weighted echo planar imaging
(EPI) gradient-echo pulse sequence with integrated par-
allel acquisition technique (IPAT), set with TR = 2 sec,
TE = 25 msec, ﬂip angle = 78, matrix = 64x64, FOV =
192 mm, in-plane voxel size = 3x3 mm, slice thickness
= 3 mm, 0.75 mm gap, and 30 total interleaved slices.
Two TRs at the beginning of the scan were discarded to
allow for scanner equilibration. There are 208 volumes
acquired for the total sequence time of 7 min and 2 sec.
Diffusion weighted MRI data were acquired on a Siemens
3T Trio scanner. 60 contiguous axial brain slices were
collected using the following parameters: 64 diffusion-
weighted (b = 1000s/mm2) and 1 non-diffusion weighted
scan; ﬁeld of view (FOV) 190x190 mm; voxel size 2x2x2
mm; TR = 8400 ms; TE = 93 ms. In addition, high-
resolution structural
images were acquired using T1-
weighted magnetization-prepared rapid-acquisition gra-
dient echo (MPRAGE; FOV 250x250 mm; voxel size:
1x1x1 mm; TR = 1900 ms, TE = 2.26 ms, ﬂip angle =
9 °).

We perform preprocessing on the HIV dataset using the
standard process as illustrated in [20]. First, we use the
DPARSF toolbox1 to process the fMRI data. We realign the
images to the ﬁrst volume, do the slice timing correction
and normalization, and then use an 8-mm Gaussian kernel
to smooth the image spatially. The band-pass ﬁltering (0.01-
0.08 Hz) and linear trend removing of the time series are

1http://rfmri.org/DPARSF.

also performed. We focus on the 116 anatomical volumes
of interest (AVOI), each of which represents a speciﬁc brain
region, and extract a sequence of responds from them. Finally,
we construct a brain network with the 90 cerebral regions.
Each node in the graph represents a brain region, and links
are created based on the correlations between different brain
regions. For the DTI data, we use FSL toolbox2 for the
preprocessing and then construct
the brain networks. The
preprocessing includes distortion correction, noise ﬁltering,
repetitive sampling from the distributions of principal diffusion
directions for each voxel. We parcellate the DTI images into
the 90 regions same with fMRI via the propagation of the
Automated Anatomical Labeling (AAL) on each DTI image
[21].

For the Bipolar dataset, the brain networks were constructed
using the CONN3 toolbox [22]. The raw EPI images were
ﬁrst realigned and co-registered, after which we perform the
normalization and smoothing. Then the confound effects from
motion artifact, white matter, and CSF were regressed out of
the signal. Finally, the brain networks were derived using the
pairwise signal correlations based on the 82 labeled Freesurfer-
generated cortical/subcortical gray matter regions.

B. Baselines and Evaluation Metrics

In brain network study, an important task is to use the graph
connectivity features for neurological disorder analysis. As
introduced above, both the HIV dataset and Bipolar dataset
have the two-view brain networks of a group of subjects with
neurological disorder and a group of normal controls. In this
paper, to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed MVGE-
HD framework for brain network analysis, we apply MVGE-
HD on each of the multi-view brain network instances in
HIV dataset and Bipolar dataset, and then we use the learned
multi-view graph embedding as the feature of each instance
and use it for clustering the subjects in HIV dataset and
Bipolar dataset, respectively. Then we evaluate the MVGE-
HD approach by investigating how well the resulting multi-
view graph embedding of MVGE-HD can help in separating
the neurological disordered subjects and normal controls. In
addition, we also look into the hubs learned by our framework
and analyze them in the perspective of neuroscience.

We compared our MVGE-HD framework with seven other
baseline methods on the HIV and Bipolar datasets. As our
proposed framework is the ﬁrst work on jointly learning multi-
view graph embedding and hubs, there is no other existing
method proposed for the same problem. Therefore, for the
evaluation, we apply several state-of-the-art methods of multi-
view graph embedding as baselines and adapt them for the
problem here.

• SingleBest applies the single-view version of the pro-
posed MVGE-HD framework (i.e., Eq.(2)) on each single
view and reports the best performance among them.

2http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki.
3http://www.nitrc.org/projects/conn

• SEC is a single view spectral embedding clustering
approach proposed in [23]. It imposes a linearity reg-
ularization on the spectral clustering model and uses
both local and global discriminative information for the
embedding.

• CoRegSc is the co-regularized based multi-view spectral
clustering framework proposed in [2]. The centroid based
approach is applied for the multi-view graph embedding
task here.

• MMSC is the multi-modal spectral clustering method
proposed by [4]. It aims to learn a commonly shared
graph Laplacian matrix by unifying different views.
• AMGL is a recently proposed multi-view spectral learn-
ing approach [17] that can automatically learn an opti-
mal weight for each graph without introducing additive
parameters.

• BC+CoRegSc is the method we combined with Between-
ness Centrality [24] and CoRegSc for evaluating if the
hubs detected would help improve the multi-view graph
embedding of CoRegSc, and also for comparing with
our method. Betweenness Centrality (BC) is a popular
method for hub detection in both social network and
brain network. We ﬁrst apply BC on each view of the
data to obtain the top-k hubs, and then we remove their
connections with other nodes in the graph by setting the
corresponding values in afﬁnity matrix to be 0. Then we
run CoRegSc with the new afﬁnity matrices from all the
views for learning the multi-view graph embedding.
• MVGE-HD* represents the proposed approach in Eq. (3)
without auto-weighted ability. We set the weight parame-
ter α(v) as 0.5 for each of the two views, and evaluate the
performance for the comparison with the auto-weighted
version of the proposed framework.

• MVGE-HD is the proposed auto-weighted framework for

multi-view graph embedding with hub detection.

After we run each of the above algorithms on the data, we
will obtain a multi-view graph embedding matrix F for each
multi-view brain network instance. To facilitate the clustering
of the instances, we use the following equation to compute
the similarity between each pair of instances [25].

(cid:114)

(cid:16)

sij = −

Tr

(Fi − Fj)T (Fi − Fj)

(12)

(cid:17)

where Fi is the multiv-view graph embedding of instance i
and Fj is the multi-view graph embedding of instance j.

Then we apply the standard spectral clustering procedure
[26] for the clustering of the brain network instances. For
the k-means clustering step in the experiment, we use the
Litekmeans [27] implementation.
As the weight factor α(v)

in the proposed MVGE-HD
framework is auto-tuned, for fair comparisons of the baseline
methods, we tune parameters for each of the baseline methods,
and report their performance with the optimal parameter set-
tings. The optimal value for the multi-view graph embedding
dimension k is selected by the grid search from {5, 6, · · · , 15}.
For each experiment, we repeat 20 times and report the mean

TABLE I
RESULTS ON HIV DATASET (MEAN ± STD).

Methods

ACC

NMI

SingleBest
SEC
AMGL
MMSC
CoRegSc
BC+CoRegSc
MVGE-HD*
MVGE-HD

0.579 ± 0.011
0.552 ± 0.010
0.582 ± 0.002
0.586 ± 0.013
0.625 ± 0.012
0.635 ± 0.009
0.613 ± 0.010
0.701 ± 0.012

0.086 ± 0.009
0.058 ± 0.011
0.091 ± 0.006
0.105 ± 0.010
0.163 ± 0.015
0.190 ± 0.008
0.152 ± 0.008
0.261 ± 0.011

TABLE II
RESULTS ON BIPOLAR DATASET (MEAN ± STD).

Methods

ACC

NMI

SingleBest
SEC
AMGL
MMSC
CoRegSc
BC+CoRegSc
MVGE-HD*
MVGE-HD

0.565 ± 0.012
0.549 ± 0.012
0.563 ± 0.001
0.608 ± 0.014
0.637 ± 0.011
0.641 ± 0.012
0.628 ± 0.010
0.712 ± 0.010

0.074 ± 0.009
0.067 ± 0.008
0.088 ± 0.006
0.119 ± 0.011
0.194 ± 0.013
0.203 ± 0.009
0.175 ± 0.009
0.266 ± 0.011

value with the standard deviation (std) as the results. In the
clustering stage of the brain network instances, we set the
number of clusters to be 2, as there are two possible labels (i.e.,
patient and normal control) in the HIV and Bipolar datasets.

We adopt the following measures for the evaluation.
• Accuracy (ACC). Let ci represent the clustering label
result of the clustering algorithm and yi represent the
ground truth label of the two-view brain network instance
i. Then Accuracy is deﬁned as:

Accuracy =

(cid:80)n

i=1 δ(yi, map(ci))
n

(13)

where δ is the Kronecker delta function, and map(ci) is
the best mapping function that permutes clustering labels
to match the ground truth labels using the KuhnMunkres
algorithm [28]. A larger ACC indicates better clustering
performance.

• Normalized Mutual Information (NMI). Normalized Mu-
tual Information is a measure used to evaluate the mutual
information entropy between the resulted cluster labels
and the ground truth labels. For any two variables X and
Y , NMI is deﬁned as:

NMI =

I(X, Y )
(cid:112)H(X)H(Y )

(14)

where I(X, Y ) computes the mutual information between
X and Y , and H(X) and H(Y ) are the entropies of X
and Y , respectively. The larger the NMI value, the better
the clustering performance.

C. Performance Analysis

Table I and Table II show the the clustering performance by
using the multi-view graph embedding obtained with each of

the seven methods on the HIV dataset and Bipolar dataset, re-
spectively. As we can see from Table I and Table II, the multi-
view graph embedding obtained by the proposed MVGE-HD
framework results in the best clustering performance on both
of the two datasets in terms of accuracy and NMI. Among
the eight methods, the SingleBest and SEC are the only two
single-view graph embedding methods, and we can ﬁnd that
they both achieve lower accuracy compared with most of the
multi-view methods, although the SingleBest performs slightly
better than AMGL on Bipolar dataset in terms of accuracy.
This indicates that the information combined from multiple
views can lead to a better graph embedding result than that of
a single view. Comparing with SEC, the SingleBest method
achieves higher accuracy and NMI on both datasets. This
is probably because that the SingleBest considers the hubs
when doing graph embedding, while SEC only focuses on the
spectral analysis for the embedding. In the experiment, the
best performance of SingleBest and SEC both occur in the
fMRI brain networks, which means that fMRI data provide
more discriminative information for SingleBest and SEC.

Among the six multi-view graph embedding methods, the
BC+CoRegSc, MVGE-HD* and the MVGE-HD consider
the hubs when performing the multi-view graph embedding,
while the three other methods do not. We can see that all
the three methods that consider hub detection achieve better
performance than the other three methods. This implies that
detecting the hubs and reducing their effect in the multi-
view graph embedding process beneﬁt the task, and the multi-
view graph embedding obtained in this case tend to be more
discriminative for the analysis of multiple graph instances.
Meanwhile, we can see that, although the BC+CoRegSc
method performs better than the other baselines, the accuracy it
achieves is still much lower than that of our proposed MVGE-
HD approach. This is mainly due to the fact that the hub
detection stage and multi-view graph embedding stage is sep-
arately done by BC+CoRegSc. The hubs detected by BC may
not correspond to the hubs implied by the multi-view graph
embedding derived from CoRegSc, although some of the hubs
detected may be helpful for the multi-view graph embedding
stage by CoRegSc. Comparatively, in the proposed MVGE-HD
framework, the hub detection is done along with the multi-
view graph embedding, and by shrinking the embedding row
vector of the potential hubs to zero, the resulted multi-view
graph embedding would reﬂect a more discriminative node
clustering structure of the graph. In addition, we ﬁnd that
the MVGE-HD* method, which is the version of MVGE-HD
with an equal weight factor as 0.5 for each view, achieves
much lower accuracy and NMI compared to the auto-weighted
MVGE-HD framework. This indicates that the auto-weighted
ability is very important for the multi-view graph embedding
with hub detection task. In the multi-view learning process,
different views may exert different levels of inﬂuence on the
multi-view task, and the optimal weight for each view often
varies from dataset to dataset. Therefore, the auto-weighted
ability of the proposed MVGE-HD framework enables it be
easily applied for different datasets.

(a) HIV

(b) Bipolar

Fig. 2. Accuracy and NMI with different c

(a) normal control

(b) bipolar subject

Fig. 3. Comparison of the brain region clusters resulted from MVGE-HD on
the brain networks of a normal control and a bipolar subject

In the proposed MVGE-HD framework, the only parameter
is the dimension of multi-view graph embedding, which is
the k introduced earlier. Now we evaluate the sensitivity of
MVGE-HD to different values of k. Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 2(b)
show the performance of MVGE-HD corresponding to the k
values ranging from 5 to 15 on the HIV dataset and Bipolar
dataset, respectively. As we can see from the ﬁgures, the value
of k affects the performance in both accuracy and NMI. For
the HIV dataset, the best accuracy and NMI are achieved when
k = 13, while the best accuracy and NMI occurs at k = 11 for
the Bipolar dataset. The changing of accuracy and NMI with
respect to different k values have similar trend on both of the
two datasets. With the increase of k value, the performance
ﬁrst keeps rising up until it reaches the peak, and then it
starts to decline. This indicates that when the dimension of
multi-view graph embdding is too low, it could not capture
enough structure information of the graph, leading to poor
performance. When the dimension is set to be a large value,
it may contain much redundant information, thus being less
discriminative to be used for the clustering task. Therefore,
the dimension of the multi-view graph embedding for the
MVGE-HD framework should be set based on the application
scenarios.

To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed MVGE-HD
framework for brain region clustering analysis, after we obtain
the multi-view graph embedding of all the brain networks,
we further apply the k-means algorithm with k equal
to
the dimension value k on the row vectors of the multi-
view graph embedding for each brain network instance and
then we visualize the clustering results using the Brain Net
Viewer toolbox [29]. Fig. 3 shows an example of the resulted
visualized brain network with 6 clusters (i.e., k = 6) of a
normal control and a bipolar subject. In the ﬁgures, each node

represents a brain region in the network, and the nodes with the
same color refer to the brain regions that have been clustered
into the same group, and the edges represent the connections
between different brain regions.

As we can see from Fig. 3(a), the clusters in the brain
network of the normal control look quite clear, while the
clusters in brain network of the bipolar subject as shown in
Fig. 3(b) is very messy. This indicates that the collaborations
of different brain regions are well-organized for the normal
control, as the regions close to each other in the brain are
usually highly correlated and tend to collaborate more in brain
activities. However, for the bipolar subject, the collaborations
of the brain regions are probably in some kind of disorder,
leading to the messy clusters as shown in Fig. 3(b). Moreover,
the big difference between the clustering maps of the two
networks is probably partially due to the difference of their
hubs. Since MVGE-HD can detect the multi-view hubs and
adjust the multi-view embedding with the hubs, when the hubs
of the neurological disordered brain networks are different
from those of normal people, the multi-view graph embedding
guided by the hub detection of MVGE-HD would also be
different for them. These observations coincide well with the
ﬁndings about hubs in neuroscience study [9]. In addition,
from Fig. 3(a), we can also ﬁnd that although some boundary
nodes between the clusters have quite a few cross edges, which
means they are the hubs in the brain network, the clusters
resulted from MVGE-HD are not blurred by these nodes. This
implies that our MVGE-HD approach can reduce the inﬂuence
of these hubs, thus leading to clear cluster boundaries and
discriminative clustering structure for the brain networks.

graph Laplacian matrix by unifying different views. For the
works in the third category, they aim to obtain a consistent
clustering across all the views by adjusting the clustering along
with learning features from the multiple views. In [3], two
solutions of multi-view graph embedding are proposed, which
use the minimum description length and tensor decomposition
principles respectively for graph clustering across multiple
views. Another classic method for ﬁnding a consistent cluster-
ing across the multiple views is the co-regularized multi-view
spectral clustering method proposed in [2], which is also a
baseline method we use in the experiments.

B. Hub Detection

Hub detection is also an essential research topic in graph
mining. In the past decade, quite a few of works have been
done in this area. Some of them focus on the structural hole
detection problem for social network analysis [8], [30]. In [30],
they propose a method based on bounded inverse closeness
centrality for analyzing the structural hole spanners, which are
viewed as the vertices that can result in the maximum increase
on the mean distance of the network if they are removed. In
[8], a model called HAM is proposed for jointly detecting
the communities and structural holes in social networks. They
show that by removing the detected structural hole spanners,
the quality of the learned communities can be improved.
Some other works aim to use the hub detection measures for
neuroscience study. For example, a review of network hubs in
human brain is presented in [7], and the rich-club organization
of the human connectome is studied in [31], which illustrate
the important role that hubs play in human brains.

VI. RELATED WORK

C. Brain Network Analysis

Our work relates to several branches of studies, which
include multi-view graph learning, hub detection and brain
network analysis.

A. Multi-View Graph Embedding

Multi-view graph embedding has been a widely studied
topic for the multi-view learning community in recent years.
The key issue in multi-view graph embedding is how to
combine the multiple views, so that both the consensus and
complementary information across different views can be
utilized for learning the embedding. The existing methods
in this ﬁeld can be divided into three categories. In the ﬁrst
category, the multiple views are often combined via integrating
the afﬁnity matrix or other graph features of each view. For
example, in [5], a multi-view spectral clustering algorithm
is proposed based on afﬁnity aggregation, which seeks for
an optimal combination of afﬁnity matrices for the spectral
clustering across multiple views. In [6], a large-scale multi-
view spectral clustering method is introduced, which uses
local manifold fusion to integrate heterogeneous features of
graphs. The second category of works aim to learn a new
Laplacian matrix by combining the Laplacian matrices of
different views. For instance, a multi-modal spectral clustering
algorithm is presented in [4] to learn a commonly shared

Brain network analysis is a prominent emphasis area in
the ﬁeld of medical data mining. So far, the researchers in
this ﬁeld aim to study the connectivity of neural systems
at different levels involving both global and local structure
information of the connections [32]. Brain network analysis
has been the focus of intense investigation owing to the
tremendous potential to provide more comprehensive under-
standing of normal brain function and to yield new insights
concerning many different brain disorders [33]–[35]. Most
connectome analyses, however, aim to learn the structure
from brain networks based on an individual neuroimaging
modality [36], [37]. For example, in [36], the identiﬁcation
of discriminative subgraph patterns is studied on fMRI brain
networks for bipolar affective disorder analysis. In [13], a
multi-graph clustering method is proposed based on interior-
node clustering for connectome analysis in fMRI resting-state
networks. Although some recent work [38] use multi-view
brain networks in connectome analysis, they focus on the
group-wise functional community detection problem instead
of doing multi-view graph embedding of each subject. Here,
we apply the proposed multi-view graph embedding on each
subject, which further facilitates the clustering of all
the
subjects, thus providing a more comprehensive strategy for
further neurological disorder identiﬁcation.

VII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we present MVGE-HD, an auto-weighted
framework of Multi-view Graph Embedding with Hub De-
tection for brain network analysis. We incorporate the hub
detection task into the multi-view graph embedding framework
so that the two tasks could beneﬁt each other. The MVGE-HD
framework learns a uniﬁed graph embedding across all the
views while reducing the potential inﬂuence of the hubs on
blurring the boundaries between node clusters in the graph,
thus leading to a clear and discriminative node clustering
structure for the graph. The extensive experimental results
on two real multi-view brain network datasets (i.e., HIV
and Bipolar) demonstrate the effectiveness and the superior
performance of the proposed framework for brain network
analysis.

REFERENCES

[1] G. Ma, L. He, C.-T. Lu, W. Shao, P. S. Yu, A. D. Leow, and A. B.
Ragin, “Multi-view clustering with graph embedding for connectome
analysis,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM International on Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management. ACM, 2017.

[2] A. Kumar, P. Rai, and H. Daume, “Co-regularized multi-view spectral
clustering,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2011,
pp. 1413–1421.

[3] E. E. Papalexakis, L. Akoglu, and D. Ience, “Do more views of a
graph help? community detection and clustering in multi-graphs,” in
Information fusion (FUSION), 2013 16th international conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 899–905.

[4] X. Cai, F. Nie, H. Huang, and F. Kamangar, “Heterogeneous image
feature integration via multi-modal spectral clustering,” in Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2011 IEEE Conference on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1977–1984.

[5] H.-C. Huang, Y.-Y. Chuang, and C.-S. Chen, “Afﬁnity aggregation
for spectral clustering,” in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2012 IEEE Conference on.

IEEE, 2012, pp. 773–780.

[6] Y. Li, F. Nie, H. Huang, and J. Huang, “Large-scale multi-view spectral

clustering via bipartite graph.” in AAAI, 2015, pp. 2750–2756.

[7] M. P. van den Heuvel and O. Sporns, “Network hubs in the human
brain,” Trends in cognitive sciences, vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 683–696, 2013.
[8] L. He, C.-T. Lu, J. Ma, J. Cao, L. Shen, and P. S. Yu, “Joint community
and structural hole spanner detection via harmonic modularity,” in
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 2016, pp. 875–884.
[9] N. A. Crossley, A. Mechelli, J. Scott, F. Carletti, P. T. Fox, P. McGuire,
and E. T. Bullmore, “The hubs of the human connectome are generally
implicated in the anatomy of brain disorders,” Brain, vol. 137, no. 8,
pp. 2382–2395, 2014.

[10] M. Belkin and P. Niyogi, “Laplacian eigenmaps and spectral techniques

for embedding and clustering.” in NIPS, 2001.

[11] Y. Fu and Y. Ma, Graph embedding for pattern analysis.

Springer

Science & Business Media, 2012.

[12] S. Yan, D. Xu, B. Zhang, H.-J. Zhang, Q. Yang, and S. Lin, “Graph
embedding and extensions: a general framework for dimensionality
reduction,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intel-
ligence, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 40–51, 2007.

[13] G. Ma, L. He, B. Cao, J. Zhang, P. S. Yu, and A. B. Ragin, “Multi-
graph clustering based on interior-node topology with applications to
brain networks,” in Joint European Conference on Machine Learning
and Knowledge Discovery in Databases. Springer, 2016, pp. 476–492.
[14] R. He, T. Tan, L. Wang, and W.-S. Zheng, “l 2, 1 regularized correntropy
for robust feature selection,” in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2012 IEEE Conference on.

IEEE, 2012, pp. 2504–2511.

[15] X. Cai, F. Nie, W. Cai, and H. Huang, “Heterogeneous image features
integration via multi-modal semi-supervised learning model,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
2013, pp. 1737–1744.

[16] T. Xia, D. Tao, T. Mei, and Y. Zhang, “Multiview spectral embedding,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cyber-
netics), vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1438–1446, 2010.

[17] F. Nie, J. Li, X. Li et al., “Parameter-free auto-weighted multiple graph
learning: A framework for multiview clustering and semi-supervised
classiﬁcation.”
International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, 2016.

[18] U. Von Luxburg, “A tutorial on spectral clustering,” Statistics and

computing, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 395–416, 2007.

[19] A. B. Ragin, H. Du, R. Ochs, Y. Wu, C. L. Sammet, A. Shoukry, and
L. G. Epstein, “Structural brain alterations can be detected early in hiv
infection,” Neurology, vol. 79, no. 24, pp. 2328–2334, 2012.

[20] B. Cao, X. Kong, J. Zhang, P. S. Yu, and A. B. Ragin, “Identifying
hiv-induced subgraph patterns in brain networks with side information,”
Brain informatics, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 211–223, 2015.

[21] N. Tzourio-Mazoyer, B. Landeau, D. Papathanassiou, F. Crivello,
O. Etard, N. Delcroix, B. Mazoyer, and M. Joliot, “Automated anatom-
ical labeling of activations in spm using a macroscopic anatomical
parcellation of the mni mri single-subject brain,” Neuroimage, vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 273–289, 2002.

[22] S. Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli and A. Nieto-Castanon, “Conn: a functional con-
nectivity toolbox for correlated and anticorrelated brain networks,” Brain
connectivity, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 125–141, 2012.

[23] F. Nie, Z. Zeng, I. W. Tsang, D. Xu, and C. Zhang, “Spectral embedded
clustering: A framework for in-sample and out-of-sample spectral clus-
tering,” IEEE Trans on Neural Networks, vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 1796–1808,
2011.

[24] U. Brandes, “A faster algorithm for betweenness centrality,” Journal of

mathematical sociology, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 163–177, 2001.

[25] B. J. Frey and D. Dueck, “Clustering by passing messages between data

points,” Science, vol. 315, no. 5814, pp. 972–976, 2007.

[26] J. Shi and J. Malik, “Normalized cuts and image segmentation,” IEEE
Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 22, no. 8,
pp. 888–905, 2000.

[27] D.
of
cn/dengcai/Data/Clustering. html, 2011.

“Litekmeans:
Software

the
available

Cai,
kmeans,”

fastest matlab

at:

http://www.

implementation
zjucadcg.

[28] H. W. Kuhn, “The hungarian method for the assignment problem,” Naval

research logistics quarterly, vol. 2, no. 1-2, pp. 83–97, 1955.

[29] M. Xia, J. Wang, and Y. He, “Brainnet viewer: a network visualization
tool for human brain connectomics,” PloS one, vol. 8, no. 7, p. e68910,
2013.

[30] M. Rezvani, W. Liang, W. Xu, and C. Liu, “Identifying top-k structural
hole spanners in large-scale social networks,” in Proceedings of the
24th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management. ACM, 2015, pp. 263–272.

[31] M. P. Van Den Heuvel and O. Sporns, “Rich-club organization of the
human connectome,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 31, no. 44, pp.
15 775–15 786, 2011.

[32] M. Kaiser, “A tutorial in connectome analysis: topological and spatial
features of brain networks,” Neuroimage, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 892–907,
2011.

[33] O. Sporns, G. Tononi, and R. K¨otter, “The human connectome: a
structural description of the human brain,” PLoS Comput Biol, vol. 1,
no. 4, p. e42, 2005.

[34] B. Cao, L. He, X. Wei, M. Xing, P. S. Yu, H. Klumpp, and A. D.
Leow, “t-BNE: Tensor-based brain network embedding,” in Proceedings
of SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM), 2017.
[35] G. Ma, L. He, C.-T. Lu, P. S. Yu, L. Shen, and A. B. Ragin, “Spatio-
temporal tensor analysis for whole-brain fmri classiﬁcation,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining.
SIAM, 2016, pp. 819–827.

[36] B. Cao, L. Zhan, X. Kong, P. S. Yu, N. Vizueta, L. L. Altshuler, and
A. D. Leow, “Identiﬁcation of discriminative subgraph patterns in fmri
brain networks in bipolar affective disorder,” in International Conference
on Brain Informatics and Health. Springer, 2015, pp. 105–114.
[37] C.-T. Kuo, X. Wang, P. Walker, O. Carmichael, J. Ye, and I. Davidson,
“Uniﬁed and contrasting cuts in multiple graphs: application to medical
imaging segmentation,” in SIGKDD, 2015.

[38] N. D. Cahill, H. Singh, C. Zhang, D. A. Corcoran, A. M. Prengaman,
P. S. Wenger, J. F. Hamilton, P. Bajorski, and A. M. Michael, “Multiple-
view spectral clustering for group-wise functional community detection,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.06981, 2016.

