Predicting Actions to Help Predict Translations

Zixiu Wu 1 Julia Ive 2 Josiah Wang 1 Pranava Madhyastha 1 Lucia Specia 1

9
1
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
L
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
2
v
5
6
6
1
0
.
8
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

We address the task of text translation on the
How2 dataset using a state of the art transformer-
based multimodal approach. The question we ask
ourselves is whether visual features can support
the translation process, in particular, given that
this is a dataset extracted from videos, we focus
on the translation of actions, which we believe
are poorly captured in current static image-text
datasets currently used for multimodal translation.
For that purpose, we extract different types of
action features from the videos and carefully in-
vestigate how helpful this visual information is
by testing whether it can increase translation qual-
ity when used in conjunction with (i) the original
text and (ii) the original text where action-related
words (or all verbs) are masked out. The latter
is a simulation that helps us assess the utility of
the image in cases where the text does not pro-
vide enough context about the action, or in the
presence of noise in the input text.

1. Introduction

Multimodal machine translation (MMT) (Specia et al., 2016)
is one of the main applications motivating the creation of the
How2 dataset (Sanabria et al., 2018). The goal was to move
away from existing datasets – namely Multi30K (Elliott
et al., 2016) – with static images and their corresponding
simple and short descriptive captions.
In the Multi30K
dataset, existing work has shown that images can be beneﬁ-
cial, especially in the presence of noisy or incomplete input
(Caglayan et al., 2019; Ive et al., 2019).

The language in the How2 dataset is not necessarily de-
scriptive and sentences are longer, less repetitive and struc-
turally more complex. While intuitively this should make
the translation task harder and under such conditions one

1Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United
Kingdom 2DCS, Shefﬁeld University, United Kingdom. Corre-
spondence to: Lucia Specia <l.specia@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

could expect that other modalities could be helpful, the gen-
eral translation quality obtained by text-only neural machine
translation models trained on this dataset is relatively high,
as reported in (Sanabria et al., 2018). Additionally, there is
not a very close equivalence between the visual and textual
modality. For example, many videos are focused on the
speaker. Therefore, making use of the additional modal-
ity becomes a much harder challenge. As a consequence,
previous experiments on MMT on this data thus far have
not been able to beneﬁt from images (Sanabria et al., 2018).
In this paper we further examine the question of whether
visual information can be helpful by (i) using a more ad-
vanced model architecture for multimodality, (ii) testing
different types of visual features and and different ways of
representating these features; and (iii) concentrating on the
translation of words which we believe the temporal nature
of videos could help with.

More speciﬁcally, in a similar way to Caglayan et al. (2019),
we probe the contribution of images by masking source
words to simulate the case of noisy or highly ambiguous
input. We focus on actions, which are generally represented
by certain verbs, as we believe this is the main additional
information one can explore in videos, as compared to static
images. We report experiments with a more advanced,
transformer-based architecture for MMT than that exploited
in Sanabria et al. (2018). Our results show that the visual
features, especially those from a CNN ﬁne-tuned for clas-
sifying videos into verb-related actions, can be beneﬁcial,
in particular for masking settings. Human evaluation of a
subset of the data conﬁrms the automatic evaluation results.

2. Dataset and Masking Strategies

We use the How2 (Sanabria et al., 2018) dataset for the
experiments, keeping the standard splits:1 184,949 train-
ing sentences, 2,022 validation sentences and 2,305 test
sentences. Our text-only baseline uses the dataset as dis-
tributed. For the masking experiments, two strategies to
replace words in the source language are deﬁned:

• Mask action verbs (ACT): All verbs which corre-
spond to an action as deﬁned in the action categori-
sations of the Moments in Time dataset (Monfort et al.,

1https://github.com/srvk/how2-dataset

Predicting Actions to Help Predict Translations

2019) are replaced by a placeholder. The masked
words (tokens) make up 2.75%, 2.83%, and 2.84%
of the training, validation, and test texts respectively.

• Mask all verbs (ALL): All verbs in the sentence are
replaced by a placeholder. The masked words (tokens)
make up 20.6%, 21.0%, and 20.4% of the training,
validation, and test texts respectively.

The masking is performed in all sentences containing (ac-
tion) verbs in the source language. For that, the data is
ﬁrst POS-tagged and lemmatised using spaCy 2.0.2 In the
case of action verbs, the resulting lemmatised tokens are
matched against the 339 lemmatised action verbs from Mon-
fort et al. (2019).3 The target language remains the same
for the purposes of both training and testing. We call the
original unmasked sentences ORG.

Figure 1 shows some examples of segments from How2
with verbs masked using the two different strategies.

Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) (Sennrich et al., 2015) with
20,000 merge operations is applied on the target training
text and each of the differently-masked source training texts
separately, leading to 4 distinct vocabularies for ORG, ALL,
ACT, and the target language respectively.

3. Visual features

ResNet-50 CNN pre-trained on ImageNet and ﬁne-tuned on
the Moments in Time dataset. We sample 16 equi-distant
frames for each video, feed them to the network, and extract
the conv4 and softmax vectors from the CNN as the visual
features of the video.

For emb, we encode each of the 339 category labels as a vec-
tor, more speciﬁcally a 300-dimensional CBOW word2vec
embedding (Mikolov et al., 2013). In the case of multiword
phrases, we average the embeddings for each word in the
phrase. For each video and for each category label, we scale
the category embedding elementwise by its corresponding
CNN softmax posterior prediction.

For each video segment in our experiments, conv4 is repre-
sented as a 7 × 7 × 2048 matrix and emb as a 339 × 300
matrix. The former can be interpreted as 49 video region
summaries, where each region is a cell of a 7 × 7 grid that
divides the video spatially. The latter can be seen as a de-
scription of the video segment based only on the 339 action
categories.

4. MMT model

We base our model on the transformer architec-
ture (Vaswani et al., 2017) for neural machine translation.
Our architecture is a multi-layer encoder-decoder using the
tensor2tensor5 (Vaswani et al., 2018) library.

We experiment with three types of visual features:

The encoder and decoder blocks are as follows:

• videosum: the output of the last fully-connected layer
of ResNeXt-101 (Xie et al., 2017) with 3D convolu-
tional kernels trained to recognise 400 different actions
(Hara et al., 2018);

• conv4: the ﬁnal convolutional layer of a 3D ResNet-
50 CNN trained to classify the 339 action verbs from
Monfort et al. (2019);

• emb: a word embedding matrix for the 339 action
verbs, with the embedding of each verb weighted by
the ﬁnal softmax layer of the same CNN for conv4.

videosum is provided ofﬁcially by the How2 Challenge.4
Each How2 video segment is divided into 16-frame chunks
as separate inputs to the network, according to Sanabria
et al. (2018), and the average of the 2048-D feature maps
for all the chunks is computed as the single-vector feature
of the video segment.

We extract conv4 and emb features using a 3D ResNet-50
CNN trained by Monfort et al. (2019), which inﬂates a 2D

2http://spacy.io/ model en core web lg
3We retain only the verb component for specialised actions

Encoder Block (E): The encoder block comprises 6 lay-
ers, with each containing two sublayers of multi-head self-
attention mechanism followed by a fully connected feed
forward neural network. We follow the standard implemen-
tation and employ residual connections between each layer,
as well as layer normalisation. The output of the encoder
forms the encoder memory which consists of contextualised
representations for each of the source tokens (ME ).

Decoder Block (D): The decoder block also comprises 6
layers. It contains an additional sublayer which performs
multi-head attention over the outputs of the encoder block.
Speciﬁcally, decoding layer dli is the result of a) multi-head
attention over the outputs of the encoder which in turn is a
function of the encoder memory and the outputs from the
previous layer: AD→E = f (ME , dli−1) where, the keys and
values are the encoder outputs and the queries correspond to
the decoder input, and b) the multi-head self attention which
is a function of the generated outputs from the previous
layer: AD = f (dli−1).

Our multimodal transformer models follow one of the two

such as playing+music and adult+male+singing

5https://github.com/tensorflow/

4https://srvk.github.io/how2-challenge/

tensor2tensor

Predicting Actions to Help Predict Translations

(cid:4) simply apply the cleanser or cream to your hands and apply it to the face and begin rubbing.
(cid:7) simply apply the cleanser or cream to your hands and apply it to the face and begin V .
(cid:78) simply V the cleanser or cream to your hands and V it to the face and V V .

(cid:4) you can draw it really lightly , go back and erase it later .
(cid:7) you can V it really lightly , go back and erase it later .
(cid:78) you V V it really lightly , V back and V it later .

(cid:4) what we are going to be doing is folding the top over and making a little casing the ribbon
will slip through .
(cid:7) what we are going to be doing is V the top over and making a little casing the ribbon will V
through .
(cid:78) what we V V to V V V V the top over and V a little V the ribbon V V through .

Figure 1. Three example segments from the How2 training dataset with verbs masked. In each example, the ﬁrst line ((cid:4)) shows the full
text segment, the second line ((cid:7)) shows the segment with verbs from Monfort et al. (2019) masked with V , the third line ((cid:78)) shows the
segment with all verbs masked with V .

formulations below for conditioning translations on image
information:

Table 1. Results for the test set. We report BLEU scores. Bold
highlights our best results.

• Additive image conditioning (AIC) The 2048-D
videosum feature vector is projected and then added
to each of the outputs of the encoder. The projection
matrix is jointly learned with the model.

• Attention over image features (AIF) The model at-
tends over image features, as in Helcl et al. (2018),
where the decoder block now contains an additional
cross-attention sub-layer AD→V which attends to the
visual information. The keys and values correspond to
the visual information.

For conv4 and emb, the attention is distributed across
the 49 video regions and the 339 action categories,
respectively. For videosum, the 2048-D feature vector
is reshaped in row-major order into a 32 × 64 matrix,
so that the attention is over the 32 rows.

SETUP

ORG

ACT

ALL

text-only
AIC-V I D E O S U M
AIF-V I D E O S U M
AIF-C O N V4
AIF-E M B

55.9
55.6
55.7
55.6
56.2

53.6
53.6
53.3
53.8
53.5

44.1
44.2
44.0
44.4
44.5

Table 2. BLEU deltas recorded when models are given incongruent
visual features, compared to the scores reported in Table 1

SETUP

AIC-V I D E O S U M
AIF-V I D E O S U M
AIF-C O N V4
AIF-E M B

ORG

ACT

ALL

↑ 0.1
↓ 0.1
↓ 0.3
↓ 0.1

↓ 0.7
↓ 0.3
↓ 0.5
↓ 0.4

↓ 1.0
↓ 0.5
↓ 0.8
↓ 0.3

Training We keep the hyperparameter settings as in Ive
et al. (2019), i.e. we use the transformer big param-
eter set with 16 heads, a hidden state size of 1024, a base
learning rate of 0.05, and a dropout rate of 0.1 for layer pre-
and post-processing at training time. We optimise our mod-
els with cross entropy loss and Adam as optimiser (Kingma
& Ba, 2014). Training is performed until convergence.6 We
optimise the number of warmup steps during the multi-GPU
training according to Popel & Bojar (2018). We apply beam
search of size 10 and alpha of 1.0 for inference.

6We use early stopping with patience of 10 epochs based on

the validation BLEU score.

5. Results

Table 1 reports the results7 of our experiments using BLEU
(Papineni et al., 2002) as metric.8

Our unmasked TEXT-ONLY baseline achieves a BLEU score
of 55.9. As expected, the scores for masked models are

7The scores may not be comparable to the ones on the How2
Machine Translation Challenge leaderboard, since we do not re-
move punctuation from the model inferences, but it is the case with
submissions to the challenge. The same caveat applies to Table 2.
8We measure the performance with Multeval (Clark et al.,
2011). We use tokenised and lowercased reference and hypotheses,
as in the ofﬁcial challenge.

(a) AIF-conv4 guesses the masked word spin correctly as dar a volta, while the text-only model translates it incorrectly as cortar
(cut) and AIF-emb translates it partially correctly as virar (turn)

Predicting Actions to Help Predict Translations

So, how do I make sure that I spin all the way around, or, how do you make sure?
EN
text-only Ent˜ao, como eu me certiﬁco de cortar a toda a volta, ou como vocˆe se certiﬁca?
AIF-conv4 Ent˜ao, como eu me certiﬁco de dar a volta, ou, como vocˆe se certiﬁca?
AIF-emb

Ent˜ao, como eu me certiﬁco de que eu viro todo o caminho, ou, como vocˆe se
certiﬁca?

PT

Ent˜ao, como eu me certiﬁco de girar ao redor, ou, como vocˆe se certiﬁca?

PT

EN

EN

In this clip we’re talking about footwork, we’re going to be covering the
moving forward aspect of it.

text-only Neste clipe, estamos falando de trabalho de p´es, vamos discutir o aspecto da

AIF-conv4 Neste clipe, estamos falando sobre o trabalho de p´es, vamos cobrir o aspecto

frente dele.

da mudanc¸a para a frente.

AIF-emb

Neste clipe, estamos falando de footwork, vamos discutir o aspecto do movi-
mento em movimento.

Neste pequeno v´ıdeo, estamos falando de trabalho de p´es, vamos estar
cobrindo o aspecto avanc¸ado.

I might use the sixty degree wedge a bit too, but the sand wedge obviously is
useful for getting out of the ruff, hitting the ball from the fairway, getting out
of sand.

Eu poderia usar a cunha de sessenta graus tamb´em, mas a cunha de areia,
obviamente, ´e ´util para sair do ruff, tirar a bola do fairway, sair da areia.

Eu poderia usar a cunha de sessenta graus um pouco tamb´em, mas a cunha de
areia obviamente ´e ´util para sair do pescoc¸o, bater na bola do fairway, saindo
da areia.

Eu posso usar a cunha de sessenta graus um pouco tamb´em, mas a cunha de
areia obviamente ´e ´util para sair do ruff, bater a bola do fairway, sair da areia.

Eu tamb´em poderia usar a wedge de sessenta graus, mas a sand-wedge,
obviamente, ´e til para sair do ruff, acertar a bola no fairway, sair da areia.

text-only

AIF-conv4

AIF-emb

PT

(b) AIF-conv4 guesses talking and covering correctly as falar (talk) and cobrir (cover); the other models get the ﬁrst word right, but
translate the other word as discutir (discuss)

(c) AIF-conv4 and AIF-emb guess hit correctly as bater (the gold-standard acertar has the same meaning this example), while the
text-only model translates it as tirar (remove)

Figure 2. Examples of improvements of AIF-conv4 and AIF-emb over the text-only baseline. Underlined text denotes masked words
and their translations.

lower: for ACT, we observe a BLEU of 53.6; for ALL a
BLEU of 44.1.

Overall, AIC-videosum is on par with TEXT-ONLY for
ACT and ALL. For ORG, a drop of 0.3 BLEU is recorded.

AIF-videosum, on the other hand, leads to degraded
performance: a 0.2 decrease for ORG, 0.3 for ACT, and 0.1
for ALL. This reveals the possibility that a single global
feature vector is better used as a whole as opposed to as
segmented sub-vectors for attention.

conv4 and emb features contribute to our best-performing
AIF-conv4
models for different masking settings.

achieves deltas of -0.3, 0.2 and 0.3 points over the text-only
model respectively for ORG, ACT and ALL. The ﬁgures for
AIF-emb models are 0.3, -0.1 and 0.4 BLEU points on the
same settings. The above also means that AIF-conv4 is
our best for ACT and AIF-emb takes the ﬁrst place for ORG
and ALL.

Overall, the top-performing models achieve modest im-
provements over the text-only baseline in each masking
setting. To probe into how much visual features matter to
the multimodal models, we conduct incongruent decoding
Caglayan et al. (2019), where we feed the visual features
in reverse order. The assumption is that models that have

Predicting Actions to Help Predict Translations

learned to exploit visual information to aid translation will
suffer from the mismatch and hence result in performance
deterioration. We summarise the results of our incongruent
decoding for the multimodal models in Table 2.

As expected, visual incongruence leads to worse results (as
much as a 1.0 BLEU drop) in almost all the settings, which
proves that multimodality indeed exerts positive inﬂuence
on the translation. Also evident from the table is that the
score changes are considerably more pronounced for ACT
and ALL than for ORG, pointing to the possibility that the
verb masking leads to the visual features being more relied
upon for translation and that a mask-free source sentence
may be sufﬁcient already for quality translation.

To sum up, a major ﬁnding is the importance of the visual
features to the multimodal translation despite the generally
moderate improvements achieved in terms of the automatic
metric. Surprisingly, the delta in BLEU between text-only
and multimodal models for the masked datasets is not sub-
stantially larger than for the original dataset (0.3 BLEU
points). It is smaller for ACT (0.2 BLEU points), and similar
for ALL (0.4 BLEU points).

Additionally, we note that in none of the model settings
are the video features able to help bridge the gap between
ORG and ACT performances, not even in AIF-conv4 and
AIF-emb where the visual features are from a CNN ﬁne-
tuned for classifying videos into classes whose labels are
closely related to the verbs masked in ACT. However, the
gap between ORG and ALL is slightly smaller for some
multimodal models than for the text-only model.

5.1. Human Analysis

Automatic metrics often fail to capture nuances in transla-
tion quality, such as the ones we expect the visual modality
to help with, which – according to human perception – lead
to better translations (Elliott et al., 2017; Barrault et al.,
2018). We thus performed human evaluation of our best
outputs involving native speakers of Portuguese (four anno-
tators) who are ﬂuent speakers of English. We focused only
on the evaluation for ACT.

The annotators were asked to rank randomly selected test
samples according to how well they convey the meaning of
the source (50 samples per annotator). For each source seg-
ment, the annotator was shown the outputs of three systems:
text-only, AIF-conv4 and AIF-emb. They also had
access to reference translations. A rank could be assigned
from 1 to 3, allowing ties (Bojar et al., 2017). Annotators
could assign zero rank to all translations if they were judged
incomprehensible.

Following the common practice in human evaluation for
many machine translation shared tasks (Bojar et al., 2017),
each system was then assigned a score which reﬂects the

proportion of times it was judged to be better than or equal
to the other two systems.

Table 3 shows the human evaluation results. Contrary to the
automatic evaluation results for ACT, the AIF-emb setup
is generally favoured by human preference. text-only
and AIF-conv4 demonstrate similar performance.

Figure 2 illustrates some cases where AIF-emb or
AIF-conv4 outperforms the text-only model.

text-only

AIF-conv4

AIF-emb

0.75

0.73

0.81

Table 3. Human ranking results for ACT: micro-averaged rank
over four annotators.

6. Conclusions

We investigated a state of the art multimodal machine trans-
lation approach on the How2 dataset. Our focus was on
exploring visual features that attempt to represent action in-
formation, and on probing their contribution when the input
text is corrupted to remove action-related words. The hy-
pothesis was that a well designed multimodal model based
on informative visual features should be able to recover from
the lack of textual information by leveraging the visual in-
formation. Our main results are as follows: (i) performance
improvements over the text-only baseline can be achieved
by the multimodal models, and the best in all three mask-
ing settings are produced by the models that exploit visual
features from an action classiﬁcation network; (ii) visual in-
formation is important to the multimodal models, especially
in the verb-masked cases where substantial performance
drops are observed in case of a visual feature mismatch;
(iii) human evaluation indicates that representing features
of verb-related actions with word embeddings to exploit
similarities between respective verbs could be beneﬁcial.
These are promising results for multimodal machine transla-
tion and for the use of action-related visual features in this
context.

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by the MultiMT (H2020 ERC
Starting Grant No. 678017) and MMVC (Newton Fund
Institutional Links Grant, ID 352343575) projects. We also
thank the annotators for their valuable help.

References

Barrault, L., Bougares, F., Specia, L., Lala, C., Elliott, D.,
and Frank, S. Findings of the third shared task on multi-
modal machine translation. In Proceedings of the Third
Conference on Machine Translation: Shared Task Papers,

Predicting Actions to Help Predict Translations

pp. 304–323. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2018. URL http://aclweb.org/anthology/
W18-6402.

Bojar, O., Chatterjee, R., Federmann, C., Graham, Y., Had-
dow, B., Huang, S., Huck, M., Koehn, P., Liu, Q., Lo-
gacheva, V., Monz, C., Negri, M., Post, M., Rubino,
R., Specia, L., and Turchi, M. Findings of the 2017
In Pro-
conference on machine translation (wmt17).
ceedings of the Second Conference on Machine Transla-
tion, pp. 169–214. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2017. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-4717. URL
http://aclweb.org/anthology/W17-4717.

Caglayan, O., Madhyastha, P., Specia, L., and Barrault,
L. Probing the need for visual context in multimodal
machine translation. CoRR, abs/1903.08678, 2019. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.08678.

Clark, J. H., Dyer, C., Lavie, A., and Smith, N. A. Bet-
ter hypothesis testing for statistical machine translation:
Controlling for optimizer instability. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pp. 176–181, Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
//www.aclweb.org/anthology/P11-2031.

Elliott, D., Frank, S., Sima’an, K., and Specia, L. Multi30k:
Multilingual english-german image descriptions.
In
5th Workshop on Vision and Language, pp. 70–74,
Berlin, Germany, 2016. URL http://aclweb.org/
anthology/W16-3210.

Elliott, D., Frank, S., Barrault, L., Bougares, F., and Spe-
cia, L. Findings of the second shared task on multi-
modal machine translation and multilingual image de-
scription. In Proceedings of the Second Conference on
Machine Translation, Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pp.
215–233, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. URL http:
//www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-4718.

Hara, K., Kataoka, H., and Satoh, Y. Can spatiotemporal
3d cnns retrace the history of 2d cnns and imagenet. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6546–6555, 2018.

Helcl, J., Libovick´y, J., and Varis, D. CUNI system for
In Proceed-
the WMT18 multimodal translation task.
ings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation:
Shared Task Papers, pp. 616–623. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 2018. URL http://aclweb.
org/anthology/W18-6441.

Ive, J., Madhyastha, Swaroop, P., and Specia, L. Distilling
Translations with Visual Awareness. In Proceedings of

the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2019.

Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. Efﬁcient
estimation of word representations in vector space. In
Bengio, Y. and LeCun, Y. (eds.), Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2013, Workshop Track Proceedings, Scottsdale, AZ,
USA, May 2013. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1301.3781.

Monfort, M., Andonian, A., Zhou, B., Ramakrishnan, K.,
Bargal, S. A., Yan, T., Brown, L., Fan, Q., Gutfruend, D.,
Vondrick, C., et al. Moments in time dataset: one million
videos for event understanding. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–8, 2019.
ISSN 0162-8828. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2019.2901464.

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J.
Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
In Proceedings of 40th Annual Meeting
translation.
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
311–318, 2002. URL http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/P02-1040.

Popel, M. and Bojar, O. Training tips for the transformer
model. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics,
110(1):43–70, 2018.

Sanabria, R., Caglayan, O., Palaskar, S., Elliott, D., Bar-
rault, L., Specia, L., and Metze, F. How2: A large-scale
dataset for multimodal language understanding. CoRR,
abs/1811.00347, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1811.00347.

Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., and Birch, A. Neural machine
translation of rare words with subword units. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1508.07909, 2015.

Specia, L., Frank, S., Sima’an, K., and Elliott, D. A shared
task on multimodal machine translation and crosslin-
In Proceedings of the First
gual image description.
Conference on Machine Translation, pp. 543–553. As-
doi:
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 2016.
10.18653/v1/W16-2346. URL http://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/W16-2346.

Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. Atten-
tion is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.

Vaswani, A., Bengio, S., Brevdo, E., Chollet, F., Gomez,
A. N., Gouws, S., Jones, L., Kaiser, Ł., Kalchbrenner,
N., Parmar, N., et al. Tensor2tensor for neural machine
translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07416, 2018.

Predicting Actions to Help Predict Translations

Xie, S., Girshick, R., Doll´ar, P., Tu, Z., and He, K. Aggre-
gated residual transformations for deep neural networks.
In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vi-
sion and pattern recognition, pp. 1492–1500, 2017.

