Cycle In Cycle Generative Adversarial Networks for
Keypoint-Guided Image Generation

Hao Tang
hao.tang@unitn.it
DISI, University of Trento
Trento, Italy

Wei Wang
wei.wang@epfl.ch
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland

Dan Xu
danxu@robots.ox.ac.uk
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK

Nicu Sebe
niculae.sebe@unitn.it
DISI, University of Trento
Trento, Italy

Gaowen Liu
g_l198@txstate.edu
Texas State University
San Marcos, USA

Yan Yan
y_y34@txstate.edu
Texas State University
San Marcos, USA

0
2
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
1
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
9
9
9
0
0
.
8
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
In this work, we propose a novel Cycle In Cycle Generative Ad-
versarial Network (C2GAN) for the task of keypoint-guided image
generation. The proposed C2GAN is a cross-modal framework ex-
ploring a joint exploitation of the keypoint and the image data
in an interactive manner. C2GAN contains two different types of
generators, i.e., keypoint-oriented generator and image-oriented
generator. Both of them are mutually connected in an end-to-end
learnable fashion and explicitly form three cycled sub-networks,
i.e., one image generation cycle and two keypoint generation cycles.
Each cycle not only aims at reconstructing the input domain, and
also produces useful output involving in the generation of another
cycle. By so doing, the cycles constrain each other implicitly, which
provides complementary information from the two different modal-
ities and brings extra supervision across cycles, thus facilitating
more robust optimization of the whole network. Extensive exper-
imental results on two publicly available datasets, i.e., Radboud
Faces [19] and Market-1501 [58], demonstrate that our approach is
effective to generate more photo-realistic images compared with
state-of-the-art models.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence; Com-
puter vision; Machine learning.

KEYWORDS
Generative Models; Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs); Ob-
ject Keypoint; Facial Landmark; Image-to-Image Translation; Hu-
man Pose Generation; Facial Expression Generation.

ACM Reference Format:
Hao Tang, Dan Xu, Gaowen Liu, Wei Wang, Nicu Sebe, Yan Yan. 2019. Cycle
In Cycle Generative Adversarial Networks for Keypoint-Guided Image

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
MM ’19, October 21–25, 2019, Nice, France
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6889-6/19/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3343031.3350980

Figure 1: The proposed C2GAN on two challenging tasks,
i.e., landmark-guided facial expression generation (Top) and
keypoint-guided person pose generation (Bottom). From left
to right: input image, ground truth target keypoint, ground
truth target image and C2GAN (ours).

Generation. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on
Multimedia (MM ’19), October 21–25, 2019, Nice, France. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3343031.3350980

1 INTRODUCTION
Humans have the ability to convert objects or scenes to another form
just by imagining, while it is difficult for machines to deal with this task.
For instance, we can easily generate mental images that have different
facial expressions and human poses. In this paper, we study how to enable
machines to perform image-to-image translation tasks, which has many
application scenarios, such as human-computer interactions, entertainment,
virtual reality and data augmentation. One important benefit of this task
is that it can help to augment training data by generating diverse images
with given input images, which thus could be employed to improve other
recognition or detection tasks.

However, the task is still challenging since: (i) it needs to handle complex
backgrounds with different illumination conditions, objects and occlusions;
(ii) it needs a high-level semantic understanding of the mapping between the
input images and the output images since the objects in the inputs may have
arbitrary poses, sizes, locations and self-occlusions. Recently, Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [11] have shown the potential to solve this dif-
ficult task, and it can be utilized, for instance, to convert a face with a neutral
expression into different expressions or to transfer a person with a specific
pose into different poses. GANs have produced promising results in many
generative tasks, such as photo-realistic image generation [3, 13, 15, 60],

video generation [5, 24, 38, 48, 49, 54], text generation [56], audio gen-
eration [47] and image inpainting [9, 57]. Recent works have developed
powerful image translation systems, e.g., Pix2pix [13] and Pix2pixHD [50] in
supervised settings, where image pairs are required. However, paired train-
ing data are usually difficult and expensive to obtain. To tackle this problem,
CycleGAN [60], DualGAN [55] and DiscoGAN [16] provide an interesting
insight, in which the models can learn the mapping from one image domain
to another with unpaired data. However, these models encounter the ef-
ficiency issue. For instance, with m different image domains, CycleGAN,
DiscoGAN, DualGAN need to train m(m−1) generators and discriminators.
While Pix2pix has to train m(m−1) generator/discriminator pairs. Recently,
Anoosheh et al. propose ComboGAN [2], which only needs to train m
generator/discriminator pairs in term of m different image domains. Tang
et al. [46] propose G2GAN, in which a dual-generator and a discriminator
can perform unpaired image-to-image translation for multiple domains. In
addition, Choi et al. [7] propose StarGAN, a single generator/discriminator
pair can perform unpaired image-to-image translation for multiple domains.
While the computational complexity of StarGAN is Θ(1), this model is not
effective in handling some specific image-to-image translation tasks such
as person image generation [20, 39] and hand gesture generation [43], in
which image generation could involve infinity image domains m since hu-
man body and hand gesture in the wild can have arbitrary poses, sizes,
appearances and locations.

To address these limitations, several works are proposed to generate
images based on object keypoints or human skeletons. Keypoint/skeleton
contains the object information of shapes and position, which can be used to
produce more photo-realistic images. For instance, Reed et al. [34] propose
GAWWN model, which generates bird images conditioned on both text
descriptions and object location. Qiao et al. [31] present GCGAN to generate
facial expression conditioned on geometry information of facial landmarks.
Song et al. [40] propose G2GAN for facial expression synthesis. Siarohin
et al. [39] introduce PoseGAN for pose-based human image generation.
Tang et al. [43] propose GestureGAN for skeleton-guided hand gesture
generation. Ma et al. [20] propose PG2, which can generate person images
using a conditional image and a target pose. An illustrative comparison
among PG2 [20], PoseGAN [39] and the proposed C2GAN is shown in
Fig. 2. PG2 tries to generate person images using target keypoints Ly . For
PoseGAN, which needs the target keypoints Ly and original keypoints Lx
as conditional inputs. Both methods only employ keypoint information as
input guidance.

Current state-of-the-art keypoint-guided image translation methods such
as PG2 [20] and PoseGAN [39] have two main issues: (i) both only directly
transfer from an original domain to a target domain, without considering the
mutual translation between each other, while the translation across different
modalities in a joint network would bring rich cross-modal information. (ii)
both simply employ the keypoint information as input reference to guide
the generation, without involving the generated keypoint information as
supervisory signals to further improve the network optimization. Both
issues lead to unsatisfactory results.

To address these limitations, we propose a novel Cycle In Cycle Gen-
erative Adversarial Network (C2GAN), in which explicitly three cycled
sub-networks are formed to learn the image translation crossing modali-
ties in a unified network structure. We have a basic image cycle, i.e., I2I2I
GI→ x ∗), which aims at reconstructing the input and
([x, Ly ]
further refine the generated images y∗. The keypoint information in C2GAN
is not only utilized as input guidance but also act as output, meaning that the
keypoint is also a generative objective. Input and output of the keypoint are

GI→ [y∗, Lx ]

connected by two keypoint cycles, i.e., K2G2K ([x, Ly ]
K2R2K ([y∗, Lx ]
), where GI and GK denotes an image and a
keypoint generator, respectively. In this way, keypoint cycles can provide
weak supervision to the generated images y∗. The intuition of the keypoint

GI→ x ∗ GK→ L∗

) and

y

x

GI→ y∗ GK→ L∗

Figure 2: An illustrative comparison of existing models (a)
PG2 [20], (b) PoseGAN [39] and (c) the proposed C2GAN.
Both PG2 and PoseGAN only use keypoint as input guidance,
while C2GAN is a cross-modal model in which keypoint in-
formation not only acts as input guidance but also acts as
output. The different cycles provide cross-modality comple-
mentary information and crossing cycle supervision for bet-
ter network optimization.

cycles is that if the generated keypoint is very close to the real keypoint,
then the corresponding images should be similar. In other words, better
keypoint generation will boost the image generation, and conversely the
improved image generation can facilitate the keypoint generation. These
three cycles inherently constraint each other in the network optimization
in an end-to-end training fashion.

Moreover, for better optimization the three cycles we propose two novel
cycle losses, i.e., Image Cycle-consistency loss (IC) and Keypoint Cycle-
consistency loss (KC). With these cycle losses, each cycle can benefit from
each other in joint learning. Moreover, we propose two cross-modal discrim-
inators corresponding to the generators. We conduct extensive experiments
on two different keypoint-guided image generation tasks, i.e., landmark-
guided facial expression generation and keypoint-guided person pose gen-
eration. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that C2GAN yields
superior performance compared with state-of-the-art approaches.

In summary, the contribution of this paper is three-fold:

• We propose a novel cross-modal generative adversarial network
named Cycle In Cycle Generative Adversarial Network (C2GAN)
for keypoint-guided image generation task, which organizes the
keypoint and the image data in an interactive generation manner
in a joint deep network, instead of using the keypoint information
only as a guidance for the input.

• The cycle in cycle structure is a new network design which explores
effective utilization of cross-modal information for the keypoint-
guided image generation task. The designed cycled sub-networks
connect different modalities, and implicitly constraint on each other,
leading to extra supervision signals for better image generation.
We also investigate cross-modal discriminators and cycle losses for
more robust network optimization.

• Extensive results on two challenging tasks, i.e., landmark-guided
facial expression generation and keypoint-guided person pose gen-
eration demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed C2GAN, and
show more photo-realistic image generation compared with existing
competing models.

2 RELATED WORK
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [11] have shown the capa-
bility of generating high-quality images [3, 12, 14, 15, 52]. Although it is
successful in many tasks, it also has many challenges, such as how to control
the content of the generated images. To generate meaningful images that

meet user requirement, Conditional GAN (CGAN) [26] is proposed where
the conditioned information is employed to guide the image generation
process. A CGAN model always combines a vanilla GAN and an external in-
formation, such as discrete class labels or tags [10, 28, 30], text descriptions
[23, 32, 34] semantic maps [29, 35, 44, 50], conditional images [13], object
masks [27] or attention maps [6, 22, 25, 45]. However, existing CGANs
synthesize images based on global constraints such as a class label, text
description or facial attribute, they do not provide control over pose, object
location or object shape.
Image-to-Image Translation models use input-output data to learn a
parametric mapping between inputs and outputs, e.g., Isola et al. [13] pro-
pose Pix2pix, which employs a CGAN to learn a mapping function from
input to output image domains. Wang et al. [50] introduce Pix2pixHD model
for synthesizing high-resolution images from semantic label maps. However,
most of the tasks in the real world suffer from the constraint of having few
or none of the paired input-output samples available. To overcome this
limitation, the unpaired image-to-image translation task has been proposed.
Different from the prior works, unpaired image-to-image translation task
learns the mapping function without the requirement of paired training data,
such as [2, 16, 42, 45, 46, 55, 59, 60]. For instance, Zhu et al. [60] introduce
CycleGAN framework, which achieves unpaired image-to-image transla-
tion using the cycle-consistency loss. DualGAN is demonstrated in [55], in
which there are image translators to be trained from two unlabeled image
sets each representing an image domain. Kim et al. [16] propose a method
based on GANs that learns to discover relations between different domains.
However, existing paired and unpaired image translation approaches
are inefficient and ineffective as discussed in the introduction section. Most
importantly, these aforementioned approaches cannot handle some specific
image-to-image translation tasks such as person image generation prob-
lem [20, 39], which could have infinity image domains since a person can
have arbitrary poses, sizes, appearances and locations in the wild.
Keypoint-guided Image-to-Image Translation. To address these afore-
mentioned limitations, several works [8, 20, 33, 39, 54] have been proposed
to generate images based on object keypoint. For instance, Di et al. [8]
propose GPGAN to synthesize faces based on facial landmarks. Reed et
al. [33] present PixelCNN model to generate images part keypoints and
text descriptions. Korshunova et al. [18] use facial keypoints to define the
affine transformations of the alignment and realignment steps for face swap.
Wang et al. [51] propose CMM-Net for landmark-guided smile generation.
Sun et al. [41] propose a two-stage framework to perform head inpainting
conditioned on the generated facial landmark in the first stage. Chan et
al. [5] propose a method to transfer motion between human subjects based
on pose stick figures in different videos. Yan et al. [54] propose a method to
generate human motion sequence with a simple background using CGAN
and human skeleton information.

The aforementioned approaches focus on a single image generation
task. However, in this paper, we propose a novel Cycle In Cycle Generative
Adversarial Network (C2GAN) which is a multi-task model and aims to
handle two different tasks using one single network, i.e., image and keypoint
generation. During the training stage, two tasks are restricted mutually by
three cycles and benefits from each other. To the best of our knowledge,
the proposed model is the first attempt to generate both the image and
the keypoint domain in an interactive generation manner within a unified
cycle in cycle GAN framework, for the keypoint-guided image translation
task. Training GANs are a complicated optimization task and incorporating
adversarial keypoint in training provides extra deep supervision to the
image generation network compared to using supervision only from the
image domain, thus facilitating the network optimization. Moreover, the
keypoint generation aims not only to approximate the ground truth output
but also to fool the discriminator, meaning that the generated keypoints
should represent a real face or a person pose. The correlations between
these keypoints can be learned in the adversarial setting.

3 CYCLE IN CYCLE GAN (C2GAN)
We start to present the proposed Cycle in Cycle Generative Adversarial
Network (C2GAN). Firstly, we introduce the network structures of the
three different image and keypoint cycles, and also describe details for the
corresponding generators and cross-modal discriminators. Secondly, the
proposed objective functions for better optimization of the model and also
will be illustrated, and finally the implementation details of the whole model
and the training procedure are introduced.

3.1 Model Overview
The goal of the proposed C2GAN is to learn two different generators in
one single network, i.e., keypoint generator and image generator. Two
generators are mutually connected through three generative adversarial
cycles, i.e., one image-oriented cycle and two keypoint-oriented cycles. In
the training stage, all the cycled sub-networks are jointly optimized in an
end-to-end fashion and each generator benefit from each other due to the
richer cross-modal information and the crossing cycle supervision. The core
framework of the proposed C2GAN is illustrated in Fig. 3. In the following,
we describe the structure details of the proposed C2GAN.

3.2 Image-Domain Generative Adversarial

Cycle

I2I2I Cycle. The goal of the image cycle I2I2I is to (i) generate image y∗ by
using the input conditional image x and the target keypoint Ly , and then
(ii) reconstruct the input image x by using the generated image y∗ and the
keypoint Lx of image x . I2I2I cycle can be formulated as:

(1)

[x, Ly ]

GI→ x ∗,

GI→ [y∗, Lx ]
where GI is the image generator. Different from previous works such as
GI→
PG2 [20] and PoseGAN [39], which only have one mapping [x, Ly ]
y∗. StarGAN [7] uses the target and original domain labels ly and lx as
condition information to recover the input image. However, StarGAN can
only handle the task which has a specific number of the category. For the
person pose generation task, which could have infinity image domains
since a person in the wild can have arbitrary poses, sizes, appearances and
locations. In order to solve this limitation, we replace domain labels ly and
lx in StarGAN by the keypoint Ly and Lx . Follow PG2 we represent the
keypoint as heatmaps. We concatenate x and Ly and feed them into the
image generator GI to generate y∗. Next, we concatenate y∗ and Lx as
inputs of GI to reconstruct the original image x . In this way, the forward
and backward consistency can be enforcedly further guaranteed.
Image Generator. We use the U-net architecture [36] for our image gen-
erator GI . U-net is comprised of encoder and decoder with skip connec-
tions between them. We use GI two times for generating image y∗ and
reconstructing image x ∗. To reduce model capacity, generators GI shares
parameters between image generation and reconstruction. For image gener-
ation, the target of GI is to generate an image y∗ = GI (x, Ly ) conditioned
on the target keypoint image Ly which is similar to the real images y.
For image reconstruction, the goal of generator GI is to recover an im-
age x ∗ = GI (y∗, Lx ) that looks close to the input images x . GI tries to
learn a combined data distribution between the generation and the recon-
struction by sharing parameters, which means GI receives double data in
optimization compared to the generators without using parameter sharing
strategy.
Cross-modal Image Discriminator. Different from previous works such
as PG2 [20] which employs a single-modal discriminator, we propose a
novel cross-modal discriminator which receives both keypoint and image
data as input. DI receives two images and one keypoint data as input.
More specifically, DI aims to distinguish between the generated triplet
[x, Ly, GI (x, Ly )] and the real triplet [x, Ly, y] during image generation

Figure 3: Framework overview of the proposed C2GAN. It contains two types of generators, i.e., image generator GI and key-
point generator GK . Parameter-sharing strategies can be used in between the image or the keypoint generators to reduce
the model capacity. In the training stage, two generators are explicitly connected by three cycles, i.e., the image cycle I2I2I:
[x, Ly ]
figure shows different cross-modal discriminators for better network optimization.

GI→ x ∗ and two keypoint cycles K2G2K: [x, Ly ]

x . The right side of the

y , K2R2K: [y∗, Lx ]

GI→ x ∗ GK→ L∗

GI→ y∗ GK→ L∗

GI→ [y∗, Lx ]

stage. We also propose an image adversarial loss LI
(GI , DI , x, y, Ly )
based on the vanilla adversarial loss [11]. The image adversarial loss can be
formulated as follows:

G AN

Cycle

3.3 Keypoint-Domain Generative Adversarial

G AN (GI , DI , x, y, Ly ) =

LI
Ex, Ly ,y∼pdata(x, Ly ,y)
Ex, Ly ∼pdata(x, Ly )[log(1 − DI ([x, Ly, GI (x, Ly )]))],

(cid:2)log DI ([x, Ly, y])(cid:3) +

(2)

GI tries to minimize LI
(GI , DI , x, y, Ly ) while DI tries to maximize
it. A similar image adversarial loss for image reconstruction mapping GI :
[y∗, Lx ] → x ∗ is defined as:

G AN

G AN (GI , DI , x, y, Lx ) =

LI
Ex, Lx ,y∼pdata(x, Lx ,y)[log DI ([y, Lx , x ])]+
Ey ∗, Lx ,y∼pdata(y ∗, Lx ,y)[log(1 − DI ([y, Lx , GI (y∗, Lx )]))],
where DI aims at distinguishing between the fake triplet [y, Lx , GI (y∗, Lx )]
and the real triplet [y, Lx , x ]. Thus the overall image adversarial loss is the
sum of Eq. (2) and Eq. (3):

(3)

LI

LI

G AN (GI , DI , x, y, Ly, Lx ) =
G AN (GI , DI , x, y, Ly ) + LI

G AN (GI , DI , x, y, Lx ).

(4)

Image Cycle-Consistency Loss. To better learn the image cycle I2I2I, we
propose an image cycle-consistency loss. The loss function writes:

CY C (GI , x, Lx , Ly ) =

LI
Ex, Lx , Ly ∼pdata(x, Lx , Ly )[ ∥GI (GI (x, Ly ), Lx ) − x ∥1].
The reconstructed images x ∗ = GI (GI (x, Ly ), Lx ) should closely match
to the input image x . Note that we use generator GI two times with
the parameter-sharing strategy, and we use L1 distance in image cycle-
consistency loss to compute a pixel-to-pixel difference between the recov-
ered image x ∗ and the real input image x .

(5)

The motivation of the keypoint cycle is that, if the generated keypoint is
similar to the real keypoint then the corresponding two images should be
very close, as we can see in Fig. 3. We have two keypoint cycles K2G2K and
K2R2K. Both of them can provide a supervision signal for optimizing better
the image cycle.
K2G2K Cycle. For the K2G2K cycle, we feed [x, Ly ] into the image gen-
erator GI to produce the target image y∗. Then we employ the keypoint
generator GK to produce the keypoint image L∗
from y∗. The generated
y
keypoint L∗
should be very close to the real keypoint image Ly . The for-
y
mulation of K2G2K can be expressed as:

(6)

(7)

[x, Ly ]

GI→ y∗ GK→ L∗
y .

K2R2K Cycle. For K2R2K cycle, the generated image y∗ and keypoint
image Lx are first concatenated, and then feed into GI to produce the
recovered image x ∗. We use GK to generate the keypoint image L∗
of
x
x ∗. We assume that the generated keypoint L∗
is very similar to the real
x
keypoint image Lx . For the K2R2K cycles, it can be formulated as:

[y∗, Lx ]

GI→ x ∗ GK→ L∗
x .

= GK (GI (x, Ly )) and L∗
x

Both generated keypoints L∗
= GK (GI (y∗, Lx ))
y
should have a close match to the input keypoint image Ly and Lx , respec-
tively. Note that the generator GK could share parameters between the two
cycles, i.e., K2G2K and K2R2K.
Keypoint Generator. We employ U-net structure [36] for our keypoint
generator GK . The input of GK is an image and the output is a keypoint rep-
= GK (y∗) and
resentation. The keypoint generator produces keypoint L∗
y
L∗
= GK (x ∗) from image y∗ and x ∗, which can provide extra supervision
x
to the image generator.

Cross-Modal Keypoint Discriminator. The proposed keypoint discrimi-
nator DK is a cross-modal discriminator. It receives both image and keypoint
data as inputs. Thus the keypoint adversarial loss for DK can be defined as:

G AN (GK , DK , y∗, Ly ) =
LK
(cid:2)log DK ([y∗, Ly ])(cid:3) +
Ey ∗, Ly ∼pdata(y ∗, Ly )
Ey ∗∼pdata(y ∗)[log(1 − DK ([y∗, GK (y∗)]))],

(8)

(GK , DK , y∗, Ly )
GK tries to minimize the keypoint adversarial loss LK
while DK tries to maximize it. DK aims to distinguish between the fake
pair [y∗, L∗
y ] and the real pair [y∗, Ly ]. A similar keypoint adversarial loss
for the mapping function GK : x ∗ → L∗
x

is defined as:

G AN

G AN (GK , DK , x ∗, Lx ) =
LK
(cid:2)log DK ([x ∗, Lx ])(cid:3) +
Ex ∗, Lx ∼pdata(x ∗, Lx )
Ex ∗∼pdata(x ∗)[log(1 − DK ([x ∗, GK (x ∗)]))],
where discriminator DK aims to distinguish between the fake pair [x ∗, L∗
x ]
and the real pair [x ∗, Lx ]. Thus, the total keypoint adversarial loss is the
sum of Eq. (8) and Eq. (9):

(9)

G AN (GK , DK , x ∗, y∗, Lx , Ly ) =
LK
G AN (GK , DK , y∗, Ly ) + LK
LK

G AN (GK , DK , x ∗, Lx ).

(10)

Keypoint Cycle-Consistency Loss. To better learn both keypoint cycles,
we propose a keypoint cycle-consistency loss, which can be expressed as:

CY C (GK , GI , x, y∗, Lx , Ly ) =
LK
Ex, Ly ∼pdata(x, Ly )[ ∥GK (GI (x, Ly )) − Ly ∥1]+
Ey ∗, Lx ∼pdata(y ∗, Lx )[ ∥GK (GI (y∗, Lx )) − Lx ∥1].
We use L1 distance in the keypoint cycle-consistency loss to compute pixel-
to-pixel difference between the generated keypoints L∗
and the real
x
keypoints Lx , Ly . During the training stage, the keypoint cycle-consistency
loss can backpropagate errors from the keypoint generator to image gen-
erator, which facilitates the optimization of the image generator and thus
improves the image generation.

, L∗
y

(11)

3.4 Joint Optimization Objective
We also note that pixel loss [20, 39] can be used to reduce changes and
constrain generators. Thus we adopt the image pixel loss between the real
images y and the generated images y∗. We express this loss as:

LI

P I X E L (GI , x, Ly, y) = Ex, Ly ,y∼pdata(x, Ly ,y)[ ∥GI (x, Ly ) − y ∥1].

(12)
We adopt L1 distance as loss measurement in image pixel loss. Consequently,
the complete objective loss is:

L(GI , GK , DI , DK ) =
λI
дan ∗ LI
дan ∗ LK
λK
G AN
, λI
, λI

+ λK

+ λI

, λK

G AN

cyc ∗ LI
cyc ∗ LK

CY C
CY C,
and λK

+ λI

pi x el ∗ LI

P I X E L

+

(13)

where λI
relative relation of objectives terms. We aim to solve:

pi x el

дan

дan

cyc

cyc

are parameters controlling the

G ∗
I , G ∗

K

= arg min
GI ,GK

max
DI , DK

L(GI , GK , DI , DK ).

(14)

3.5 Implementation Details
In this section, we introduce the detailed network implementation, the
training strategy and the inference.
Network Architecture. For a fair comparison, we use the U-net architec-
ture in PG2 [20] as our generators. The encoder of generators is built with
the basic Convolution-BatchNorm-LReLU layer. The decoder of generators
is built with the basic Convolution-BatchNorm-ReLU layer. The leaky ReLUs
in the encoder has a slope 0.2, while all ReLUs in the decoder are not leaky.

After the last layer, a Tanh function is used. We employ the PatchGAN
discriminator [13, 60] as our discriminators DI and DK . The discriminators
are built with the basic Convolution-BatchNorm-ReLU layer. All ReLUs are
leaky, with slope 0.2. After the last layer, a convolution is applied to map it
to a 1-D value, followed by a Sigmoid function.
Training Strategy. We follow the standard optimization method from [11]
to optimize the proposed C2GAN, i.e., we alternate between one gradient
descent step on GI , DI , GK , and DK , respectively. The proposed C2GAN is
trained end-to-end and can generate image and keypoint image simultane-
ously, then the generated keypoint will benefit the quality of the generated
image. Moreover, in order to slow down the rate of discriminators DI , DK
relative to generators GI , GK we divide the objectives by 2 while optimizing
discriminators DI , DK . To enforce discriminators to remember what it has
done wrong or right before, we use a history of generated images to up-
date discriminators similar in [60]. Moreover, we employ OpenFace [1] and
OpenPose [4] to extract keypoint images Lx and Ly on the Radboud Faces
and Market-1501 datasets, respectively. Keypoint of Market-1501 dataset
are represented as heatmaps similar as in PG2 [20]. In contrast, we set the
background of the heatmap to white color and the keypoint to black color
on Radboud Faces dataset.
Inference. At inference time, we follow the same settings of PG2 [20] and
PoseGAN [39] via inputting an image x and a target keypoint Ly into the
image generator GI , and then obtain the output target image. Similarly,
the keypoint generator GK receives the image x as input and then outputs
the keypoint of image x . We employ the same setting at both training and
inference stage.

4 EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we first introduce the details of the datasets used in our
experiments, and then we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
C2GAN and training strategy by presenting and analyzing qualitative and
quantitative results.

4.1 Experimental Setup
Datasets. We employ two publicly datasets to validate the proposed C2GAN
on two different tasks, including Radboud Faces dataset [19] for landmark-
guided facial expression generation task, and Market-1501 dataset [58]
for keypoint-guided person image generation task.

(i) The Radboud Faces dataset [19] contains over 8,000 color face images
collected from 67 subjects with eight different emotional expressions, i.e.,
anger, fear, disgust, sadness, happiness, surprise, neutral and contempt. It
contains 1,005 images for each emotion and is captured from five cameras
with different angles, and each subject is asked to show three different gaze
directions. For each emotion, we randomly select 67% of images as training
data and the rest 33% images as testing data. Different from StarGAN [7],
all the images in our experiments are re-scaled to 256×256×3 without any
pre-processing. For the landmark-guided facial expression generation task,
we need pairs of images of the same face with two different expressions. We
first remove those images in which the face is not detected correctly using
the public OpenFace software [1], leading to 5,628 training image pairs and
1,407 testing image pair.

(ii) The Market-1501 dataset [58] is a more challenging person re-id
dataset and we use it for the person keypoint and person image generation
task. This dataset contains 32,668 images of 1,501 persons captured from six
disjoint surveillance cameras. Persons vary in pose, illumination, viewpoint
and background in this dataset, which makes the person image generation
task more challenging. We follow the setup in PoseGAN [39]. For the train-
ing subset, we obtain 263,631 pairs, which is composed of two images of
the same person but different poses. For testing subset, we randomly select
12,000 pairs. Note that no person overlapping between the training and
testing subsets in this dataset.

Figure 4: Qualitative results of ablation study on Radbound
Faces dataset.

Table 1: Quantitative results of ablation study on Radbound
Faces dataset. For all metrics, higher is better.

Baseline
C2GAN w/ I2I2I
C2GAN w/ I2I2I+K2G2K
C2GAN w/ I2I2I+K2R2K
C2GAN w/ I2I2I+K2G2K+K2R2K
C2GAN w/ Single-Modal D
C2GAN w/ Non-Sharing G

AMT

PSNR

SSIM

25.3
28.2
28.7
30.8
26.4

21.2030
20.8708
21.0156
21.6262
21.2794

0.8449
0.8419
0.8437
0.8540
0.8426

32.9

21.6353

0.8611

Parameter Setting. For both datasets, we do left-right flip for data augmen-
tation similar in PG2 [20]. For optimization, the proposed C2GAN is trained
with a batch size of 16 on Radboud Faces dataset. For a fair comparison, all
competing models were trained for 200 epochs on Radboud Faces dataset.
We use the Adam optimizer [17] with the momentum terms β1 = 0.5 and
β2 = 0.999. The initial learning rate for Adam optimizer is 0.0002. For the
person image generation task, we train the model for 90 epochs with a
smaller batch size 4.

Moreover, we found that the keypoint generator cannot produce accurate
keypoints in the early training stage since the image generator produces
blurry images during this phase. Therefore, we employ a pre-trained Open-
Pose model [4], which replaces the keypoint generator to produce keypoints
with location coordinates at the beginning of the training stage. We also
minimize the distance between the generated keypoints (from the generated
image) and the corresponding ground truth keypoints (from the ground
truth image). Finally, we incorporate the mask loss proposed in PG2 for
person image generation task.

cyc

cyc

cyc

дan

дan

дan

дan

, λI

pi x el

, λK

and λK

, λK
, λI

pi x el
, λI

For hyper-parameters setting, we fixed λI

to 1 and tune the
rest using the grid search. We found that the weights of reconstruction losses
(i.e., λI
) set between 10 and 100 yield good performance.
cyc
in Eq. (13) are set to 1, 10, 10,
and λK
Thus, λI
1 and 10, respectively. The proposed C2GAN is implemented using public
deep learning framework PyTorch. To speed up the training and testing
processes, we use an NVIDIA TITAN Xp GPU with 12G memory.
Evaluation Metric. We first adopt AMT perceptual studies to evaluate
the quality of the generated images on both datasets similar to [20, 39].
To seek a quantitative measure that does not require human participation,
Structural Similarity (SSIM) [53] and Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) are
employed to evaluate the quantitative quality of generated images on the
Radboud Faces dataset.

For Market-1501 dataset on person image generation task, we follow [39]
and use SSIM, Inception Score (IS) [37] and their corresponding masked
versions mask-SSIM and mask-IS [20] as measurements.

Figure 5: Qualitative comparison with competitors on Rad-
boud Faces dataset. From left to right: input image, ground
truth target landmark, ground truth target image, GP-
GAN [8], PG2 [20] and C2GAN (ours).

Table 2: Quantitative results of different methods on Rad-
boud Faces dataset. For all metrics, higher is better.

Model

Publish

AMT

SSIM

PSNR

GPGAN [8]
PG2 [20]
C2GAN (Ours)
Real Data

ICPR 2018
NIPS 2017
-
-

0.3
28.4
34.2
-

0.8185
0.8462
0.8618
1.000

18.7211
20.1462
21.9192
Inf

4.2 Model Analysis
We first investigate the effect of the combination of different individual
generation cycles to demonstrate the importance of the proposed cycle-in-
cycle network structure. Then the parameter-sharing strategy used in the
generators for reducing the network capacity is evaluated, and finally the
performance influence from the cross-modal discriminators is tested. All
the comparison experiments are conducted via training the models for 50
epochs on Radbound Faces dataset. Fig. 4 shows examples of the qualitative
results and Table 1 shows the quantitative results.
Influence of Individual Generation Cycle. To evaluate the influence of
individual generation cycle, we test with four different combinations of the
cycles, i.e., I2I2I, I2I2I+K2G2K, I2I2I+K2R2K, and I2I2I+K2G2K+K2R2K. All
four baselines use the same training strategies and hyper-parameters. As
we can see in Table 1, I2I2I, K2G2K and K2R2K are all critical to our final
results and the removal of one of them degrades the generation performance,
demonstrating our initial intuition that by using cross-modal information
in a joint generation framework and by making the cycles constraint on
each other boost the final performance. I2I2I+K2G2K+K2R2K obtains the
best performance, which is significantly better than the single cycle image
network I2I2I, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed C2GAN.
Cross-Modal Discriminator vs. Single-Modal Discriminator. We also
evaluate the performance influence of the proposed cross-modal discrim-
inator (C2GAN w/ I2I2I+K2G2K+K2R2K). Our baseline is the traditional
single-modal discriminator (C2GAN w/ Single-Modal D). The single modal-
D means the discriminator receives only images as input, i.e., the real input
images and the generated images. From Table 1, it is clear that the pro-
posed cross-modal discriminator performs better than the single-modal
discriminator on all evaluation metrics, meaning that the rich cross-modal
information could help to learn better discriminator and thus facilitate the
optimization of the generator.
Parameter Sharing between Generators. The parameter sharing could
remarkably reduce the parameters of the whole network. We further eval-
uate how parameter sharing would affect generation performance. We

Figure 6: More examples of the qualitative results of the proposed C2GAN on the Market-1501 dataset. From left to right: input
image, ground truth target keypoint, ground truth target image and C2GAN (ours).

test two different baselines: one is C2GAN w/ I2I2I+K2G2K+K2R2K, which
shares the parameters of the two image generators GI and the two keypoint
generators GK , respectively. While C2GAN w/ Non-Sharing G separately
learns the four generators. We can observe from Table 1 that the non-sharing
one achieves slightly better performance than sharing one. However, the
number of parameters of non-sharing one is 217.6M, which doubles that of
the sharing one. It means that the parameter sharing is a good strategy for
balancing performance and overhead.

4.3 Comparison against the State-of-the-Art
Competing Models. We consider several state-of-the-art keypoint-guided
image generation models as our competitors, i.e., GPGAN [8], PG2 [20],
DPIG [21] and PoseGAN [39]. Note that for PG2, DPIG and PoseGAN, all
of them need to use off-the-shelf keypoint detection models to extract the
keypoints, and all of them are restricted on dataset sources or tasks where the
keypoint information is available. Different from PG2, DPIG and PoseGAN,
which focus on the person image generation task, the proposed C2GAN is a
general model and learns image and keypoint generation simultaneously in
a joint network. For a fair comparison, we implement all the models using
the same setups as our approach.
Task 1: Landmark-Guided Facial Expression Generation. A qualita-
tive comparison of different models on the Radboud Faces dataset is shown

in Fig. 5. It is clear that GPGAN performs the worse among all the compar-
ison models. While the results of PG2 tend to be blurry. Compared with
both GPGAN and PG2, the results of C2GAN are more smooth, sharper and
contains more image details.

Existing competitors such as PG2 [20] conduct the experiments on
256×256 resolution images. For a fair comparison with them, we also con-
duct experiments on this image resolution size but note that the proposed
C2GAN can be applied for any size images with only small architecture
modification.
Task 2: Keypoint-Guided Person Image Generation. Fig. 8 shows the
results of PG2, PoseGAN and C2GAN on the Market-1501 dataset. As we
can see, the proposed C2GAN is able to generate visually better images
than PG2 and PoseGAN. For the first row of results in Fig. 8, C2GAN can
generate reasonable results while PG2 cannot produce any meaningful
content. PoseGAN can generate the person but cannot preserve the color
information. For the second row of results in Fig. 8, both PoseGAN and PG2
failed to generate the same child, while C2GAN can generate the same child
with only a small part missing at the head. For the last row of results in
Fig. 8, we can clearly observe the advantage of C2GAN as both PoseGAN
and PG2 failed to generate the hat. We also provide more qualitative results
of C2GAN in Fig. 6. As we can see that the proposed C2GAN can generate
photo-realistic images with convincing details. Moreover, the generated
images are very close to the ground truths.

Figure 7: Visualization of keypoint generation on the Radboud Faces dataset.

Table 3: Quantitative results of different models on Market-1501 dataset. For all the metrics, higher is better.

AMT (R2G) AMT (G2R)

SSIM

IS

mask-SSIM mask-IS

Publish

Model
PG2 [20]
NIPS 2017
DPIG [21]
CVPR 2018
PoseGAN [39] CVPR 2018
C2GAN (Ours)
Real Data

-
-

11.2
-
22.7
23.2
-

5.5
-
50.2
46.7
-

0.253
0.099
0.290
0.282
1.000

3.460
3.483
3.185
3.349
3.860

0.792
0.614
0.805
0.811
1.000

3.435
3.491
3.502
3.510
3.360

the best performance on the Radboud Faces dataset with all the metrics for
landmark-guided facial expression generation task. Moreover, we quanti-
tatively compare the proposed C2GAN with PoseGAN, DPIG and PG2 on
keypoint-guided person image generation task in Table 3. We can observe
that C2GAN obtains better performance than PG2 and DPIG on all the
evaluation metrics except for IS. Compared with PoseGAN, C2GAN yields
very competitive performance. Specifically, we achieve better performance
in terms of the AMT (R2G), IS, mask-SSIM and mask-IS metrics.

4.4 Visualization of Keypoint Generation
C2GAN is a cross-modal generation model and it is not only able to pro-
duce the target person but also able to produce the keypoint of the input
image. Both generation tasks benefit from the improvement of each other
in an end-to-end training fashion. We present examples of the keypoint
generation results on Radboud Faces dataset in Fig. 7. The inputs are image
x and keypoint Ly and the outputs are image y∗ and keypoint L∗
, other
x
images and keypoints are given for comparison. As we can see that the gen-
erated keypoint L∗
is very close to the real keypoint Lx , which verifies the
x
effectiveness of the keypoint generator Gk and the joint learning strategy.

5 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel Cycle In Cycle Generative Adversarial
Network (C2GAN) for keypoint-guide image generation task. C2GAN con-
tains two different types of generators, i.e., keypoint-oriented generator
and image-oriented generator. The image generator aims at reconstructing
the target image based on a conditional image and the target keypoint, and
the keypoint generator tries to generate the target keypoint and further
provide cycle supervision to the image generator for generating more photo-
realistic images. Both generators are connected in a unified network and
can be optimized in an end-to-end fashion. Both qualitative and quantita-
tive experimental results on facial expression and person pose generation
tasks demonstrate that our proposed framework is effective to generate
high-quality images with convincing details.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to thank the NVIDIA Corporation for the donation of the TITAN
Xp GPUs used in this work.

Figure 8: Qualitative comparison with PG2 and PoseGAN
on the Market-1501 dataset. From left to right: input im-
age, ground truth target keypoint, ground truth target im-
age, PoseGAN [39], PG2 [20] and C2GAN (ours).

Finally, we also note that GANs are difficult to train and easily have mode
collapse. However, in keypoint-guided image generation tasks, avoiding
mode collapse is not necessarily needed since if you input a person image
and a target pose, the model tries to generate this particular person in this
particular pose.
Quantitative Comparison of Both Tasks. We provide here quantitative
results and analysis on both tasks. As shown in Table 2, C2GAN achieves

REFERENCES
[1] Brandon Amos, Bartosz Ludwiczuk, and Mahadev Satyanarayanan. 2016. Open-
Face: A general-purpose face recognition library with mobile applications. Technical
Report. CMU-CS-16-118, CMU School of Computer Science.

[2] Asha Anoosheh, Eirikur Agustsson, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. 2018.
ComboGAN: Unrestrained Scalability for Image Domain Translation. In CVPR
Workshop.

[3] Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. 2018. Large scale gan training

for high fidelity natural image synthesis. In ICLR.

[4] Zhe Cao, Tomas Simon, Shih-En Wei, and Yaser Sheikh. 2017. Realtime multi-

person 2d pose estimation using part affinity fields. In CVPR.

[5] Caroline Chan, Shiry Ginosar, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. 2018. Everybody

dance now. In ECCV Workshop.

[6] Xinyuan Chen, Chang Xu, Xiaokang Yang, and Dacheng Tao. 2018. Attention-

GAN for object transfiguration in wild images. In ECCV.

[7] Yunjey Choi, Minje Choi, Munyoung Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, Sunghun Kim, and
Jaegul Choo. 2018. StarGAN: Unified Generative Adversarial Networks for Multi-
Domain Image-to-Image Translation. In CVPR.

[8] Xing Di, Vishwanath A Sindagi, and Vishal M Patel. 2018. GP-GAN: gender

preserving GAN for synthesizing faces from landmarks. In ICPR.

[9] Brian Dolhansky and Cristian Canton Ferrer. 2018. Eye in-painting with exemplar

generative adversarial networks. In CVPR.

[10] Bin Duan, Wei Wang, Hao Tang, Hugo Latapie, and Yan Yan. 2019. Cascade
Attention Guided Residue Learning GAN for Cross-Modal Translation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.01826 (2019).

[11] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative adversarial
nets. In NIPS.

[12] Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron

Courville. 2017. Improved training of wasserstein gans. In NIPS.

[13] Phillip Isola, Junyan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. 2017. Image-to-

image translation with conditional adversarial networks. In CVPR.

[14] Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. 2018. Progressive

growing of gans for improved quality, stability, and variation. In ICLR.

[15] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. 2019. A style-based generator archi-

tecture for generative adversarial networks. In CVPR.

[16] Taeksoo Kim, Moonsu Cha, Hyunsoo Kim, Jungkwon Lee, and Jiwon Kim. 2017.
Learning to discover cross-domain relations with generative adversarial networks.
In ICML.

[17] Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-

tion. In ICLR.

[18] Iryna Korshunova, Wenzhe Shi, Joni Dambre, and Lucas Theis. 2017. Fast face-

swap using convolutional neural networks. In ICCV.

[19] Oliver Langner, Ron Dotsch, Gijsbert Bijlstra, Daniel HJ Wigboldus, Skyler T
Hawk, and AD Van Knippenberg. 2010. Presentation and validation of the
Radboud Faces Database. Taylor & Francis Cognition and emotion (2010).
[20] Liqian Ma, Xu Jia, Qianru Sun, Bernt Schiele, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool.

2017. Pose guided person image generation. In NIPS.

[21] Liqian Ma, Qianru Sun, Stamatios Georgoulis, Luc Van Gool, Bernt Schiele, and

Mario Fritz. 2018. Disentangled person image generation. In CVPR.

[22] Shuang Ma, Jianlong Fu, Chang Wen Chen, and Tao Mei. 2018. DA-GAN: Instance-
level image translation by deep attention generative adversarial networks. In
CVPR.

[23] Elman Mansimov, Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.

2015. Generating images from captions with attention. In ICLR.

[24] Michael Mathieu, Camille Couprie, and Yann LeCun. 2016. Deep multi-scale

video prediction beyond mean square error. In ICLR.

[25] Youssef Alami Mejjati, Christian Richardt, James Tompkin, Darren Cosker, and
Kwang In Kim. 2018. Unsupervised attention-guided image-to-image translation.
In NeurIPS.

[26] Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. 2014. Conditional generative adversarial nets.

[27] Sangwoo Mo, Minsu Cho, and Jinwoo Shin. 2019. InstaGAN: Instance-aware

[28] Augustus Odena. 2016. Semi-supervised learning with generative adversarial

arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784 (2014).

Image-to-Image Translation. In ICLR.

networks. In ICML Workshop.

[29] Taesung Park, Ming-Yu Liu, Ting-Chun Wang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. 2019. Semantic

image synthesis with spatially-adaptive normalization. In CVPR.

[30] Guim Perarnau, Joost van de Weijer, Bogdan Raducanu, and Jose M Álvarez. 2016.

Invertible Conditional GANs for image editing. In NIPS Workshop.

[31] Fengchun Qiao, Naiming Yao, Zirui Jiao, Zhihao Li, Hui Chen, and Hongan
Wang. 2018. Geometry-Contrastive Generative Adversarial Network for Facial
Expression Synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.01822 (2018).

[32] Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Bernt Schiele,
and Honglak Lee. 2016. Generative Adversarial Text-to-Image Synthesis. In
ICML.

[33] Scott Reed, Aäron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, Victor Bapst, Matt Botvinick,
and Nando de Freitas. 2016. Generating interpretable images with controllable
structure. Technical Report (2016).

[34] Scott E Reed, Zeynep Akata, Santosh Mohan, Samuel Tenka, Bernt Schiele, and

Honglak Lee. 2016. Learning what and where to draw. In NIPS.

[35] Krishna Regmi and Ali Borji. 2018. Cross-view image synthesis using conditional

gans. In CVPR.

[36] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. 2015. U-net: Convolutional

networks for biomedical image segmentation. In MICCAI.

[37] Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford,

and Xi Chen. 2016. Improved techniques for training gans. In NIPS.

[38] Aliaksandr Siarohin, Stéphane Lathuilière, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu
Sebe. 2019. Animating arbitrary objects via deep motion transfer. In CVPR.
[39] Aliaksandr Siarohin, Enver Sangineto, Stephane Lathuiliere, and Nicu Sebe. 2018.

Deformable GANs for Pose-based Human Image Generation. In CVPR.

[40] Lingxiao Song, Zhihe Lu, Ran He, Zhenan Sun, and Tieniu Tan. 2018. Geometry

guided adversarial facial expression synthesis. In ACM MM.

[41] Qianru Sun, Liqian Ma, Seong Joon Oh, Luc Van Gool, Bernt Schiele, and Mario
Fritz. 2018. Natural and effective obfuscation by head inpainting. In CVPR.
[42] Yaniv Taigman, Adam Polyak, and Lior Wolf. 2017. Unsupervised cross-domain

image generation. In ICLR.

[43] Hao Tang, Wei Wang, Dan Xu, Yan Yan, and Nicu Sebe. 2018. GestureGAN for

Hand Gesture-to-Gesture Translation in the Wild. In ACM MM.

[44] Hao Tang, Dan Xu, Nicu Sebe, Yanzhi Wang, Jason J Corso, and Yan Yan. 2019.
Multi-channel attention selection gan with cascaded semantic guidance for cross-
view image translation. In CVPR.

[45] Hao Tang, Dan Xu, Nicu Sebe, and Yan Yan. 2019. Attention-Guided Generative
Adversarial Networks for Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation. In IJCNN.
[46] Hao Tang, Dan Xu, Wei Wang, Yan Yan, and Nicu Sebe. 2018. Dual Generator
Generative Adversarial Networks for Multi-Domain Image-to-Image Translation.
In ACCV.

[47] Aäron Van Den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol
Vinyals, Alex Graves, Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew W Senior, and Koray
Kavukcuoglu. 2016. WaveNet: A generative model for raw audio.. In SSW.
[48] Carl Vondrick, Hamed Pirsiavash, and Antonio Torralba. 2016. Generating videos

with scene dynamics. In NIPS.

[49] Tingchun Wang, Mingyu Liu, Junyan Zhu, Guilin Liu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz,

and Bryan Catanzaro. 2018. Video-to-video synthesis. In NeurIPS.

[50] Tingchun Wang, Mingyu Liu, Junyan Zhu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan
Catanzaro. 2018. High-Resolution Image Synthesis and Semantic Manipulation
with Conditional GANs. In CVPR.

[51] Wei Wang, Xavier Alameda-Pineda, Dan Xu, Pascal Fua, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu
Sebe. 2018. Every smile is unique: Landmark-guided diverse smile generation. In
CVPR.

[52] Xiaolong Wang and Abhinav Gupta. 2016. Generative image modeling using

style and structure adversarial networks. In ECCV.

[53] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. 2004. Image
quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE TIP 13, 4
(2004), 600–612.

[54] Yichao Yan, Jingwei Xu, Bingbing Ni, Wendong Zhang, and Xiaokang Yang. 2017.

Skeleton-aided Articulated Motion Generation. In ACM MM.

[55] Zili Yi, Hao Zhang, Ping Tan Gong, et al. 2017. DualGAN: Unsupervised Dual

Learning for Image-to-Image Translation. In ICCV.

[56] Lantao Yu, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. 2017. SeqGAN: Sequence

Generative Adversarial Nets with Policy Gradient.. In AAAI.

[57] Jichao Zhang, Meng Sun, Jingjing Chen, Hao Tang, Yan Yan, Xueying Qin, and
Nicu Sebe. 2019. GazeCorrection: Self-Guided Eye Manipulation in the wild using
Self-Supervised Generative Adversarial Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00805
(2019).

[58] Liang Zheng, Liyue Shen, Lu Tian, Shengjin Wang, Jingdong Wang, and Qi Tian.

2015. Scalable person re-identification: A benchmark. In ICCV.

[59] Shuchang Zhou, Taihong Xiao, Yi Yang, Dieqiao Feng, Qinyao He, and Weiran
He. 2017. GeneGAN: Learning Object Transfiguration and Attribute Subspace
from Unpaired Data. In BMVC.

[60] Junyan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. 2017. Unpaired
image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In ICCV.

