SUBMITTED FOR PUBLICATION TO IET BIOMETRICS

1

Strengths and Weaknesses of Deep Learning Models
for Face Recognition Against Image Degradations

Klemen Grm1,2,3, Vitomir ˇStruc2,3, Anais Artiges4, Matthieu Caron4, Hazim Kemal Ekenel5

7
1
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
 
 
]
L
M

.
t
a
t
s
[
 
 
1
v
4
9
4
1
0
.
0
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based
approaches are the state-of-the-art in various computer vision
tasks, including face recognition. Considerable research effort is
currently being directed towards further improving deep CNNs
by focusing on more powerful model architectures and better
learning techniques. However, studies systematically exploring
the strengths and weaknesses of existing deep models for face
recognition are still relatively scarce in the literature. In this
paper, we try to ﬁll this gap and study the effects of different
covariates on the veriﬁcation performance of four recent deep
CNN models using the Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) dataset.
Speciﬁcally, we investigate the inﬂuence of covariates related to:
image quality – blur, JPEG compression, occlusion, noise, image
brightness, contrast, missing pixels; and model characteristics –
CNN architecture, color information, descriptor computation;
and analyze their impact on the face veriﬁcation performance
of AlexNet, VGG-Face, GoogLeNet, and SqueezeNet. Based on
comprehensive and rigorous experimentation, we identify the
strengths and weaknesses of the deep learning models, and
present key areas for potential future research. Our results
indicate that high levels of noise, blur, missing pixels, and
brightness have a detrimental effect on the veriﬁcation perfor-
mance of all models, whereas the impact of contrast changes
and compression artifacts is limited. It has been found that the
descriptor computation strategy and color information does not
have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on performance.

I. INTRODUCTION

Recent advances in deep learning and convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have contributed to signiﬁcant performance
improvements in a number of computer vision problems,
ranging from low-level vision tasks, such as saliency detection
and modeling [3], [24] to higher-level problems such as object
detection [10], [28], recognition [12], [11], [25], [14], [35],
tracking [1], [39], [38], or semantic segmentation [2], [7],
[33]. Deep learning-based approaches have been particularly
successful in the ﬁeld of face recognition, where contemporary
deep models now report near perfect performance on popu-
lar, long-standing benchmarks such as Labeled Faces in the
Wild [16], which due to its difﬁculty, represented the de facto
standard for evaluating face recognition technology for nearly
a decade.

Most of the ongoing research on deep learning-based face
recognition focuses on new model architectures, better tech-
niques for exploiting the generated face representations, and
related approaches aimed at improving both the performance

1 Correspondence email: klemen.grm@fe.uni-lj.si
2 First authors with equal contributions
3 University of Ljubljana, Faculty of electrical Engineering
4 ENSEA, Graduate School in Electrial and Computer Engineering
5 Istanbul Technical University

and robustness of deep face recognition technology on com-
mon benchmark tasks [37], [31], [27]. Research in these
areas is typically conducted on unconstrained datasets with
various sources of image variability present at once, which
makes it difﬁcult to draw clear conclusions about the sources
of errors and problems that are not addressed appropriately
by the existing deep CNN models. Much less work is de-
voted to the systematical assessment of the robustness of
deep learning models for face recognition against speciﬁc
variations. Considering the widespread use of deep CNN
models for face recognition, it is of paramount importance
that the behavior and characteristics of these models are well
understood and open problems pertaining to the technology
are clearly articulated.

In this paper, we contribute towards a better understanding
of deep learning-based face recognition models by studying
the impact of image-quality and model-related characteristics
on face veriﬁcation performance. We use four state-of-the-
art deep CNN models, i.e., AlexNet [22], VGG-Face [27],
GoogLeNet [36], and SqueezeNet [17], to compute image
descriptors from input images and investigate how quality-
related factors such as blur, compression artifacts, noise,
brightness, contrast, and missing data affect their performance.
Furthermore, we also explore the importance of color infor-
mation and descriptor computation strategies through rigorous
experimentation using the Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW)
benchmark [16]. The deep CNN models considered in this
work are representatives of the most commonly employed
CNN architectures in use today and were selected due to
their popularity within the research community. The studied
covariates, on the other hand, represent factors commonly en-
countered in real life that are known to affect face recognition
technology to a signiﬁcant extent [18] and have not yet been
studied sufﬁciently in the literature in the context of deep
learning.

The comprehensive analysis presented in this paper builds
on the previous works from [26], [19]. These works both
focused on closed-set face identiﬁcation and investigated the
robustness of deep CNN models under facial appearance
variations caused by head pose, illumination, occlusion, mis-
alignment in [26] and by image degradations in [19]. Com-
plementing and extending these previous works, we provide in
this paper a rigorous and systematical evaluation of the impact
of various image- and model-related factors on deep learning-
based face veriﬁcation performance. The goal of this work is to
provide answers to essential research questions, such as: Are
good quality images a must for high veriﬁcation performance?
To what extent does image quality affect the image descriptors

SUBMITTED FOR PUBLICATION TO IET BIOMETRICS

2

generated by contemporary deep models? Are certain model
architectures more robust than others against variations of spe-
ciﬁc covariates? Changes in which quality characteristics are
most detrimental to the veriﬁcation performance? How should
image descriptors be computed? Answers to these and similar
questions are in our opinion crucial for a better understanding
of deep learning-based face recognition technology and may
point to open problems that need to be addressed in the future.
In summary, we make the following contributions in this paper:
• We study and empirically evaluate the effect of image
quality (blur, JPEG compression, noise, contrast, bright-
ness, missing data) and model related (color information,
descriptor computation) characteristics on the face ver-
iﬁcation performance of four state-of-the-art deep CNN
models on the LFW dataset.

• We conduct a comprehensive analysis of the experimental
results, identify the most detrimental covariates affecting
deep CNN models in face veriﬁcation task and point to
potential areas for improvement.

• We provide a comparative evaluation of the four deep
CNN models, namely, AlexNet [22], VGG-Face [27],
GoogLeNet [36], and SqueezeNet [17], and make the
trained models publicly available to the research com-
munity through: https://github.com/kgrm/face-recog-eval.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section
II, we brieﬂy review previous works relevant to our study. In
section III, we describe the evaluation methodology, models,
datasets, and experimental procedures used. In section IV,
we present quantitative results and discuss our experiments.
Finally, section V concludes the paper.

II. RELATED WORK

Understanding the strengths and weaknesses of machine
learning models is of paramount importance for real-world
applications and a prerequisite for identifying future research
and developments needs. Papers on the analysis of deep
models appear in the literature in either i) work that focuses
speciﬁcally on the characteristics of deep models, or ii) work
that explores the characteristics of deep models as part of
another contribution. Papers from the ﬁrst group, such as ours,
typically explore various models and as the main contribution
present general ﬁndings that apply to several deep models,
while papers from the second group propose a new deep
learning approach and then analyze its characteristics. Both
groups of work typically contribute to a better understanding
of deep models, but differ in their generality, i.e., the number
of models the ﬁndings apply to.

An example of work studying the impact of various image-
quality covariates on the performance of several deep CNN
models was presented by Dodge and Karam in [8]. Here, the
authors explored the inﬂuence of noise, blur, contrast, and
JPEG compression on the performance of four deep neural
network models applied to the general image classiﬁcation
task. The authors concluded that noise and blur are the most
detrimental factors.

In [5] Chatﬁeld et al. compared traditional machine learning
models and deep learning models on equal footing by using

the same data augmentation and preprocessing techniques
that are commonly used with convolutional neural networks
on traditional machine learning models. The authors also
explored the importance of color information, but focused
on the impact of color on traditional models rather that on
its role in deep learning. The main ﬁnding of this work
was that deep learning models have an edge over traditional
machine learning models. However, data augmentation, color
information, and other preprocessing tasks were found to be
important, as these approaches also helped to improve the
performance of traditional machine learning models.

An alternative view on covariate analyses involving deep
models was recently presented by Richard-Webster et al.
in [29]. In this work the authors compare and evaluate several
deep convolutional neural network architectures from the
perspective of visual psychophysics. In the context of the
object recognition task, they use procedurally rendered images
of 3-D models of objects corresponding to the ImageNet
object classes to determine the “canonical views” learned by
deep convolutional neural networks and determine the net-
works’ performance when viewing the objects from different
angles and distances or when the images are subjected to
deformations such as random linear occlusion of the object
bounding box, Gaussian blur, and brightness changes. The
main point made by the authors is that model comparison must
be conducted under variations of the input data, or in other
words, the analysis of the robustness of the models should be
used as a methodological tool for model comparison.

Our work builds on the preliminary results reported in [19]
and [26] and extends our previous results to face veriﬁcation
experiments on the LFW dataset and a wide range of image-
quality and model-related covariates. The analysis includes a
larger number of deep CNN models and is signiﬁcantly more
comprehensive in terms of amount of analyzed factors.

Dosovitskiy et al. describe research belonging to the group
of model-analysis work in [9]. Here, the authors present an
evaluation of the performance of their convolutional neural
network in the presence of image transformations and defor-
mations in the context of unsupervised image representation
learning.

They conclude that combining several sources of image
transformations can allow convolutional neural networks to
better learn general image representations in an unsupervised
manner. Similar to this work, we study in this paper the effects
of image deformations on the learned image representations.
However different from [9], we assess several convolutional
neural networks trained in a supervised manner.

Another work from this group was presented by Zeiler
the authors studied the effects
and Fergus in [40]. Here,
of image covariates including rotation, translation, and scale
in the context of interpreting and understanding the inter-
nal representations produced by deep convolutional neural
networks trained on the ImageNet object classiﬁcation task.
In their experiments,
the invariance of their convolutional
neural network to the studied covariates was found to increase
signiﬁcantly with network depth. They also found the deep
neural network features to increase in discriminative power
with network depth in the context of transfer learning.

SUBMITTED FOR PUBLICATION TO IET BIOMETRICS

3

More recently, Lenc and Vedaldi in [23] evaluates how well
the properties of equivariance, invariance, and equivalence
are preserved in the presence of image transformations by
various image representation models including deep convolu-
tional neural networks. The transformations studied include
rotation, mirroring, and afﬁne transformations of the input
images. Amongst their ﬁndings, representations based on deep
convolutional neural networks were found to be better than
other studied representations at learning either invariance or
equivariance to the studied transformations based on training
objectives.

III. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we ﬁrst explain the evaluation methodology
and introduce the four deep CNN models selected for the
analysis. We then proceed by presenting the dataset and
procedure used to train the deep models and conclude the
section with a detailed description of the covariates considered
in this work.

A. Evaluation methodology

To assess the robustness of deep CNN models against
various image degradations in face veriﬁcation, we take four
pretrained state-of-the-art deep models and use the feature
output of each model as the image descriptor of the given
input face image, i.e.:

y = f (x),
(1)
where x ∈ Rd denotes the input image, f (·) represents the
selected deep model and y ∈ Rd(cid:48)
stands for the computed
image descriptor. The dimensionality of the image descriptor,
d(cid:48), varies from model to model and depends on the design
choices made during network construction. Once the descrip-
tors are computed for a pair of face images, a similarity score
is calculated based on the cosine similarity between the two
descriptors and used to make a veriﬁcation decision:

(cid:26)w1,

if δ(f (x1), f (x2)) = δ(y1, y2) ≥ T

g(x1, x2, f, T ) =

w2, otherwise

(2)
where x1 and x2 are the input images, δ(·, ·) is the cosine
similarity, T is a predeﬁned decision threshold, and w1 and
w2 represent classes of matching and non-matching identities,
respectively. Thus, a pair of images should be classiﬁed into
the class w1 if the input images belong to the same identity
and into the class w2 if not. To assess the robustness of the
deep models with respect to different image-quality covariates,
we artiﬁcially degrade one of the images in Eq. (2) by adding
different levels of noise, blur, compression artifacts and the
like and leave the second one unaltered. With this procedure,
we are able to directly observe the change in veriﬁcation
performance as a consequence of the change in image quality
and establish a connection between a given image-quality
aspect and the performance of the deep model.

We report our results using the performance metrics intro-
duced by the LFW veriﬁcation protocol [15], namely, the mean
and standard deviation of the veriﬁcation accuracy under a 10-
fold cross-validation experimental protocol. As prescribed by
the LFW experimental protocol, the decision threshold T is
selected separately for each fold.

B. Deep CNN Models

We consider four recent deep CNN models in our exper-
iments that are representative of the most popular network
architectures commonly used for recognition problems, i.e.:

AlexNet: The ﬁrst model used in our evaluation is the
AlexNet [22], which was the ﬁrst deep convolutional neural
network to successfully demonstrate performance outperform-
ing the classical image object recognition procedures. The
model consists of ﬁve sequentially connected convolutional
layers of decreasing ﬁlter size, followed by three fully-
connected layers. One of the main characteristics of AlexNet
is the very rapid downsampling of the intermediate represen-
tations through strided convolutions and max-pooling layers.
The last convolutional map is reshaped into a vector and
treated as an input to a sequence of two fully-connected layers
of 4096 units in size. The output of this layer represents the
image descriptor produced by AlexNet.

VGG-Face: The second model used in our experiments is
the 16-layer VGG-Face network, initially introduced in [27].
The model has a deeper convolutional architecture than
AlexNet and exploits a series of convolutional layers with
small ﬁlter sizes, i.e. 3 × 3. Each series of convolutional
layers is followed by a max-pooling layer, except for the
last one, which is followed by two fully-connected layers
identical to AlexNet. The output of the last fully-connected
layer represents the VGG image descriptor.

GoogLeNet: Our third model is the GoogLeNet network,
which builds on the so-called Inception architecture [35], [36].
Here, we use the third version of the GoogLeNet model,
that is, Inception V3 [36], which consists of a hierarchy of
complex inception modules/blocks that combine channel re-
projection, spatial convolution, and pooling operations over
different scales in each of the modules. The model reduces
the parameter space by decomposing spatial convolutions with
larger ﬁlter sizes (n × n) into a sequence of two convolutional
operations with respective ﬁlter sizes of n × 1 and 1 × n.
The resulting network model is deeper and more complex
than AlexNet or VGG-Face, but still has fewer parameters and
lower computational complexity than VGG-Face. Unlike other
models considered in this work, no fully-connected layers
are used in GoogLeNet. Instead, the last convolutional map
is subjected to channel-wise global average pooling, and the
average activation values of each of the 2048 channels are
used as the feature vector of the input image.

SqueezeNet: The last model we assess in our experiments
is a variant of the SqueezeNet network from [17]. The
network features extreme reductions in parameter space and
computational complexity via channel-projection bottlenecks
(or squeeze layers), and uses identity-mapping shortcut
connections, similar to residual networks [14], which allow
for stable training of deeper network models. SqueezeNet
was demonstrated to achieve comparable performance to
AlexNet
large-scale recognition
benchmark with substantial reductions in model complexity
and parameter space size. The model is comprised of so-called
“ﬁre modules”, in which the input map is ﬁrst fed through
a bottlenecking channel-projection layer and then divided

[22] on the ImageNet

SUBMITTED FOR PUBLICATION TO IET BIOMETRICS

4

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF THE QUANTITATIVE PROPERTIES OF THE DEEP LEARNING MODELS CONSIDERED.

Model
AlexNet [22]
VGG-Face [27]
GoogLeNet [36]
SqueezeNet [17]

#parameters
58 282 752
117 479 232
21 577 728
3 753 856

input size
(3, 224, 224)
(3, 224, 224)
(3, 299, 299)
(3, 224, 224)

output size
4096
4096
2048
2048

#layers
7
15
37
12

FLOPS / fwd. pass
1.1 × 109
1.5 × 1010
5.6 × 109
9.7 × 108

into two channel sets. The ﬁrst one is expanded through a
3 × 3 convolution and the other through channel projection.
The ﬁnal convolution map is globally average-pooled into a
512-vector and then fed to a fully-connected layer with 2048
units. The output of this last layer is the SqueezeNet image
descriptor used in our experiments.

Note that using deep models as “black-box” feature ex-
tractors is a standard way of computing (learned) descriptors
from input images, as evidenced by the large body of existing
research on this topic, e.g., [32], [29], [4]. Furthermore,
using distance metrics in the feature-space for similarity score
calculation is also a standard practice in the ﬁeld of biometric
veriﬁcation, see for example [37], [27]. All in all the deep neu-
ral network architectures considered in this work are amongst
the most popular ones found in the literature and differ greatly
in computational complexity, the number of parameters, depth,
and representational power. We summarize their key properties
including the output feature vector (descriptor) size in Table I.

C. Datasets

We use separate datasets for training and evaluation. We
chose the VGG face dataset [27] to train our models and the
LFW dataset [16] to evaluate their performance.

The VGG face dataset was collected during the work on
the VGG-Face model [27] and, as reported by the authors,
comprises around 2.6 × 106 images of 2622 identities. Using
the image URLs and face region coordinates published by the
authors, we are able to retrieve approximately 1.8 × 106 of the
total 2.6 × 106 face images for our version of the dataset. The
structure of the VGG dataset, with a uniformly distributed and
relatively large number of images per subject, 1000, makes
it similar in utility for training deep neural networks to the
ImageNet dataset, which is used for image classiﬁcation [30].
For the experiments, we train the four deep CNN models
described in the previous section from scratch using our
version of the VGG face dataset to attain a fair comparison of
their expressivity and other properties given the same training
dataset. We train the models by appending a fully-connected
softmax layer on top of each network and optimizing the
model weights in accordance with the recognition performance
on the VGG data. We use the Adam [21] gradient optimization
method with the categorical cross-entropy loss function. Dur-
ing training, we randomly select 10% of the images of each
subject for a hold-out validation set to gauge generalization
performance. Each model is trained to convergence using a
GTX Titan X GPU. The training takes approximately two days
each for the AlexNet and SqueezeNet models, and one week
each for the GoogLeNet and VGG-FACE models.

For testing purposes, we select the Labeled Faces in the
Wild [16] dataset, which is among the most popular datasets
used to evaluate face recognition models. The dataset consists
of 13233 images of 5749 distinct subjects, and ships with
predeﬁned training and evaluation protocols. Images of the
dataset were gathered from the web and feature considerable
variation in pose, lighting condition, facial expression, and
background. We evaluate our models in accordance with the
so-called outside-data veriﬁcation protocol, which consists of
6000 image pairs drawn from the dataset equally divided
between genuine and impostor pairs, and further equally
divided into 10 folds for cross-validation. The protocol also
allows to use images not part of LFW to train the models
being evaluated.

D. Performance Covariates

The performance of deep face recognition models depends
on several factors (or covariates) that can be grouped into
different categories. In this paper we are interested in factors
that relate to i) the quality of the input images (image-quality
covariates), and ii) the characteristics of the deep models
(model-related covariates).

Image-quality covariates: To evaluate the impact of re-
duced image quality on the performance of our deep models,
we apply image distortions of different levels/intensities to
the probe images used in our veriﬁcation experiments. Specif-
ically, we consider the following:

• Blur: We simulate blurring effects by applying Gaussian
ﬁlters with different standard deviations σ to the probe
images. We set the ﬁlter size in accordance with the
selected standard deviations, i.e., w, h = 2 (cid:100)2σ(cid:101) + 1,
where (cid:100)·(cid:101) is the ceiling operation and w and h stand
for the ﬁlter width and height, respectively. We vary the
value of σ from 2 to 20 and, thus, generate 19 probe
sets of different blur levels to investigate the impact of
blurring on the performance of our deep models.

• Compression: We introduce compression artifacts by
encoding the probe images with the JPEG algorithm at
different quality presets. Lower quality presets correspond
to more aggressive quantization of the DCT (Discrete Co-
sine Transform) coefﬁcients. At the extreme, the quality
of 1 corresponds to the setting where all AC components
of every MCU (Minimum Coded Unit) block are zeroed
out, and each 8×8 pixel block is represented by a constant
color. We generate modiﬁed probe sets at quality presets
of 1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35 and 40 for exploring the
impact of JPEG compression.

• Gaussian noise: To study the impact of noise on the
recognition performance of our deep models, we add

SUBMITTED FOR PUBLICATION TO IET BIOMETRICS

5

corresponding training procedure used to learn the model
parameters. As indicated in the introduction section, a
signiﬁcant amount of todays research effort related to
deep models is, therefore, directed towards this area (see
e.g. [13], [36], [17]). In the experimental section, we
account for different architectures by evaluating the four
deep CNN models described in Section III-B.

• Descriptor computation: One of the key components
of state-of-the-art face recognition systems is the visual
descriptor used to encode the input images [5]. With deep
the visual descriptor is typically
learning approaches,
computed directly from the image area returned by the
face detector. The predominant approach here is to feed
the detected facial area to the trained deep model and
use the output of one of the top fully-connected layers as
the visual descriptor of the input image. An alternative
approach is to sample patches from the input
image
and to combine the corresponding patch representations
into the ﬁnal visual descriptor. Examples of the latter
approach include averaging [27] or stacking [34] of patch
representations and variants of Fisher Vector (FV) encod-
ing [6]. For our experiments, we consider four descriptor
computation strategies. The ﬁrst is a simple approach,
where the visual descriptor is computed directly from the
facial area found by the face detector. The remaining three
approaches are more complex and sample smaller patches
from the facial area before averaging the patch representa-
tions generated by the models to produce the ﬁnal image
descriptor. We explore three sampling schemes using, 5,
10, and 30 patches sampled from the detected facial area.
The sampling schemes were implemented based on the
suggestions in [27] and are illustrated in Fig. 1

• Color space: We consider three distinct scenarios relating
to the color information of the target and probe images
used in the veriﬁcation experiments. In the ﬁrst two cases,
given a color target image, we evaluate the difference
in veriﬁcation performance of the deep models given
either color or gray-scale probe images. In the third case,
we evaluate the performance of the models when target
and query images are both gray-scale. The goal of the
color-related experiments is to investigate the need for
color input images and the capabilities of the models to
efﬁciently handle gray-scale images.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this section, we describe our experiments aimed at
assessing the strengths and weaknesses of the selected four
deep models. We ﬁrst present experiments related to image-
quality covariates and then report results pertaining to the
model-related covariates described in the previous section.

A. Impact of image-quality covariates

In the ﬁrst series of veriﬁcation experiments, we explore
the impact of Gaussian blur and JPEG compression. As can
be seen in Fig. 2 (left),
image blurring has a signiﬁcant
effect on the performance of all deep models, which causes
a quick drop in performance with an increase in the standard

Fig. 1.
Illustration of the three sampling schemes used to study different
descriptor-computation strategies (from left to right): the 5-patch (left), 10-
patch (center) and 30-patch (right) schemes.

additive Gaussian noise with a mean of 0 and various
standard deviations σ to our probe images. The modiﬁed
pixel intensities are clipped to the valid dynamic range of
[0, 255]. We generate 10 modiﬁed probe sets for σ values
between 20 and 200, with a uniform step size of 20.
• Salt-and-pepper noise: Besides Gaussian noise, we also
consider salt-and-pepper noise. Here, we truncate all
color components of each image pixel to zero with a
probability of p
2 and, similarly, set them to 255 with a
probability of p
2 . We generate 25 modiﬁed probe sets for
probabilities p between 0.02 and 0.5, with a uniform step
size of 0.02.

• Brightness: We simulate overexposure effects by chang-
ing the brightness level of the probe images. To this
end, we multiply the pixel intensities by a brightness
factor and clip the resulting pixel values to the valid
dynamic range between [0, 255]. We observe the impact
of brightness factors between 1.5 and 9 with a constant
step size of 0.5 and generate 16 probe sets for our
brightness related experiments.

• Contrast: To explore the impact of contrast on the
veriﬁcation performance, we ﬁrst subtract
the central
value of the dynamic range from all images. The centered
images are then multiplied by a contrast factor and the
offset, i.e., the central value, is added back to the image.
We evaluate the performance of the models at 15 different
contrast factors between 0.03 and 0.79.

• Missing data: We simulate missing data (or pixels) by
removing contiguous pixel areas from the probe images.
Because we set all pixels in the given area to zero, the
simulation of missing data is similar in effect to (artiﬁcial)
partial occlusions of the face. We generate 5 degraded
probe sets with pixels missing around the mouth, nose,
periocular and eye regions. To be able to remove im-
age regions belonging to prominent facial features in a
consistent manner, we use the facial landmark detection
approach proposed by Kazemi and Sullivan in [20].
Model-related covariates: Among the model-related co-

variates, we explore the following ones:

• Model architecture: Arguably the most important factor
affecting the performance of the existing deep face recog-
nition approaches is the architecture of the models and

SUBMITTED FOR PUBLICATION TO IET BIOMETRICS

6

Fig. 2. Impact of blurring (left) and JPEG compression (right) on the performance of the four deep models. The graphs show the mean and standard deviation
of the veriﬁcation accuracy on the LFW dataset computed over ten folds. The images on top of the graphs show sample images generated with different levels
of image distortions. The results are best viewed in color.

deviation of the Gaussian ﬁlters. Interestingly, the GoogLeNet
model loses veriﬁcation accuracy faster than the other three
models. When looking at the impact of JPEG compression in
Fig. 2 (right), we see that all models are mostly unaffected
by the compression artifacts until the compression quality is
at its lowest possible value. Here, a compression quality of 0
corresponds to the scenario where all AC DCT coefﬁcients are
rounded to 0. Thus, only the DC components remain unaltered,
and consequently every MCU is represented by a constant
color. This is equivalent to uniformly downscaling the image
by a factor of 8. We observe that the veriﬁcation accuracy of
all models at the lowest JPEG quality roughly corresponds to
the accuracy on the target images degraded with Gaussian blur
with σ = 5, which is consistent with the above interpretation
of the JPEG compression process in the sense that the amount
of information preserved in the blurred and compressed images
is approximately the same.

In the second series of experiments, we investigate the
impact of Gaussian and salt-and-paper noise on the veriﬁcation
performance of the four deep models. From the results in
Fig. 3, we see that the models behave similarly for both types
of noise. The VGG-Face model performs the best and more
robustly, followed by the AlexNet and SqueezeNet models,
which perform more or less the same, and the GoogLeNet
model, which is affected the most by the presence of noise.
These results suggest that noise is an important factor affect-
ing the performance of deep models and consequently that
sufﬁciently low levels of noise need to be assured for reliable
veriﬁcation performance.

In the third series of veriﬁcation experiments, we study the
effects of brightness and contrast. We can see from the results
in Fig. 4 (left) that the increase in brightness has a signiﬁcant

impact on the veriﬁcation performance of the deep models and
affects all models to more or less the same extent. In relative
terms no model has an edge over the others even at higher
brightness factors, which is expected as important discrimina-
tive information is lost during the brightening process due to
the pixel truncation. However, in absolute terms the VGG-Face
model is the top performer ensuring the highest veriﬁcation
accuracy at all brightness factors. When looking at the results
for different contrast factors in Fig. 4 (right), we see that the
relative performance of all models degrades similarly as the
contrast decreases. In general the models are not particularly
affected by the loss of contrast, as the veriﬁcation accuracy
remains well above 0.9 even when more than 60% of the
contrast is removed.

In the last series of experiments pertaining to image quality,
we evaluate the effects of missing data on the veriﬁcation
performance. The results are displayed in Fig. 5 in the form of
box plots. We can see that the impact of missing data follows
the same relative ranking for all models: missing information
around the periocular region is the most detrimental for the
veriﬁcation performance, followed in order by the eye, nose,
and mouth regions. Interestingly, we can see that the VGG-
Face model is the most affected by missing data around the
periocular region, whereas the performance degradation for
other regions is equal or lower than the degradations of the
other models. We can also notice that the relative ranking of
the tested models changes with respect to the image region,
from which textural information was removed. While VGG-
Face is the top performer in terms of average veriﬁcation
accuracy on the original images, it falls behind SqueezeNet
and GoogLeNet when data around the eye, nose or periocular
regions is missing. All in all, GoogLeNet appears to be the

SUBMITTED FOR PUBLICATION TO IET BIOMETRICS

7

Fig. 3.
deviation of the veriﬁcation accuracy on the LFW dataset computed over ten folds. The results are best viewed in color.

Impact of Gaussian (left) and salt-and-pepper (right) noise on the performance of the four deep models. The graphs show the mean and standard

most robust to missing data, as the performance variations are
the smallest with this model.

Overall, our experiments suggest that image quality is a
crucial factor for the performance of existing deep models
and that quality assessment of the input images should be an
integral part of face recognition approaches based on deep
learning. To mitigate problems pertaining to image quality
image enhancement techniques need to be used or suitable
data augmentation approaches need to be integrated into the
training procedures to make the models robust against image-
quality degradations.

B. Impact of model-related covariates

In the ﬁrst series of experiments pertaining to model-
related covariates, we assess the impact of different model
architectures on the performance and robustness of the LFW
veriﬁcation task. We present our comparison in the form of
radar charts for different probe sets that correspond to the
color-coded sample images at the top of Figs. 2- 4. For ex-
ample, the red curve in each chart corresponds to experiments
with the probe images marked red in Figs. 2- 4, the green
curve to experiments with probe images marked green and so
on. Here, the larger the area covered by a curve the better
the performance of the models across various image-quality
covariates and the closer the different color curves are to each
other for a given architecture, the robuster the architecture
is to variations of the covariates. While all models perform
similarly, the VGG-Face model has overall a slight advantage
in term of robustness over the remaining three models. The
SqueezeNet and AlexNet models perform almost the same,
whereas our implementation of GoogLeNet is the least robust.
In the second series of veriﬁcation experiments of this
part, we evaluate the four different descriptor-computation

strategies. The results of our experiments are presented in
Fig. 7 in the form of box-and-whiskers plots computed from
the 10 experimental folds deﬁned by the LFW veriﬁcation
protocol. In these experiments we use the original LFW images
without any degradations. We ﬁnd that the SqueezeNet and
VGG-Face models beneﬁt marginally from averaging of the
generated patch representations. While the trend shows an
increase of 1%-2% in veriﬁcation accuracy by using more than
a single patch to generate the image descriptors, the differences
in performance are not statistically signiﬁcant. The AlexNet
and GoogLeNet models, on the other hand, do not show any
improvements in performance. These results are unexpected
as all models were trained with random patches sampled from
the base face regions. We also note that while the SqueezeNet
and VGG-Face models show some improvement when using 5
patches compared to only the central patch, there is no further
improvement from the 10- or 30-patch schemes.

In the last series of experiments on model-related covariates
we explore the impact of color information. The results of
the experiment are shown in Fig. 8 again in the form of box
plots. All models exhibit the best performance, when target and
probe images are both in color, which is expected given that
they were trained on color data exclusively. However, with the
exception of AlexNet, we note that the accuracy of the models
drops only marginally, when either the probe or both the target
and probe images are switched to gray-scale. The difference
in performance is not statistically signiﬁcant, which points to
a potential degree of redundancy in the models’ architecture,
observing that eliminating two-thirds of the input information
results in nearly identical performance.

SUBMITTED FOR PUBLICATION TO IET BIOMETRICS

8

Impact of image brightness (left) and image contrast (right) of the veriﬁcation performance of our four deep models. The graphs show the mean and

Fig. 4.
standard deviation of the veriﬁcation accuracy on the LFW dataset computed over ten folds. The results are best viewed in color.

Fig. 5.
Impact of missing data on the performance of the four deep models. The box plots show results for missing data at four different image locations,
i.e., around the mouth, the nose, the periocular region and around the eyes. The box plots were computed from the 10 experimental fold deﬁned by the LFW
veriﬁcation protocol.

V. CONCLUSION

We have presented a systematic study of covariate effects
on face veriﬁcation performance of four recent deep CNN
models. We observe that the studied models are affected by
image quality to different degrees, but all of them degrade
in performance quickly and signiﬁcantly, when evaluated on

lower-quality images than they were trained with. However,
given proper architecture choices and training procedures, a
deep learning model can be made relatively robust to common
sources of image quality degradations.

We found that the models considered were the most eas-
ily and consistently degraded in performance through image

SUBMITTED FOR PUBLICATION TO IET BIOMETRICS

9

Fig. 6. Impact of the model architecture on the performance and robustness of the veriﬁcation procedure. Here, the line colors correspond to the color-coded
sample images on top of Figs. 2- 4. A larger area covered by a curve indicates a better performance. The closer the curves of different color are in a given
graph, the more robust the model is to image-quality degradations.

Fig. 7. Performance evaluation for different sampling schemes. The box
plots show results for the four sampling strategies, where image descriptors
are computed based on either 1, 5, 10 or 30 face patches. The box plots were
computed from the 10 experimental fold deﬁned by the LFW veriﬁcation
protocol.

Fig. 8. Performance evaluation between color and grayscale images. For
each model, three comparisons were made: color-color, color-grayscale and
grayscale-grayscale

blurring, which is similar in nature to real-life scenarios
of attempting face recognition from low-resolution imagery.
Other covariates found to have a considerable effect on the
veriﬁcation performance were noise, image brightness, and
missing data, while image contrast and JPEG compression
impacted the performance of the models only marginally.

Most of the models considered were least affected by

changes in input color space - despite being trained on full
color images – their performance drops negligibly when eval-
uated on grayscale images. This ﬁnding is also corroborated
by the results of the contrast experiments.

No speciﬁc architecture was found to be signiﬁcantly more
robust than others to all covariates. The VGG-Face model, for
example, was most robust to noise, but performed least well for
changes in image brightness. GoogLeNet, on the other hand,

SUBMITTED FOR PUBLICATION TO IET BIOMETRICS

10

performed worst on noise and image blur, but had a slight
advantage over the remaining models with images of reduced
contrast.

Based on our results, we identify the following prospective

directions of further research related to deep models:

• Image enhancement - various algorithms exist to enhance
the appearance of blurred or low-resolution images for
human perception. Given the low face recognition perfor-
mance on such images, their applicability to automated
face recognition systems is likely to be an important
research direction for deep face recognition models in
the future.

• Exploitation of color information - given the fact that
most of the models we studied retained almost unaltered
performance when presented with grey-scale images, it
appears to be the case that the architectures considered
here do not make proper use of color information in their
input images. It follows that better deep learning models
could be developed that either make more efﬁcient use of
their input information, or that discard color information
altogether in favor of more compact models.

• Recognition from partial data - missing data proved to
be a challenge for all evaluated models with performance
deteriorating more, when larger contiguous areas of the
images known to be important for identity inference were
removed, e.g., the periocular region. This observation
suggests that research into deep CNN models capable
of recognition from partially observed data is needed and
should be a focus of future research efforts.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This research was supported in parts by the ARRS (Slove-
nian Research Agency) Research Programme P2-0250 (B)
Metrology and Biometric Systems, by ARRS through the
junior researcher programme and by a Marie Curie FP7
Integration Grant within the 7th EU Framework Programme.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Alahi, K. Goel, V. Ramanathan, A. Robicquet, L. Fei-Fei, and
S. Savarese. Social LSTM: Human trajectory prediction in crowded
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
spaces.
and Pattern Recognition, pages 961–971, 2016.

[2] V. Badrinarayanan, A. Handa, and R. Cipolla. Segnet: A deep con-
volutional encoder-decoder architecture for robust semantic pixel-wise
labelling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.07293, 2015.

[3] N. D. Bruce, C. Catton, and S. Janjic. A deeper look at saliency: feature
contrast, semantics, and beyond. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 516–524, 2016.
[4] S. Chaib, H. Yao, Y. Gu, and M. Amrani. Deep feature extraction and
combination for remote sensing image classiﬁcation based on pre-trained
cnn models. In Ninth International Conference on Digital Image Pro-
cessing (ICDIP 2017), pages 104203D–104203D. International Society
for Optics and Photonics, 2017.

[5] K. Chatﬁeld, K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman. Return of the
devil in the details: Delving deep into convolutional nets. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1405.3531, 2014.

[6] J.-C. Chen, S. Sankaranarayanan, V. M. Patel, and R. Chellappa. Uncon-
strained face veriﬁcation using ﬁsher vectors computed from frontalized
In Biometrics Theory, Applications and Systems (BTAS), 2015
faces.
IEEE 7th International Conference on, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2015.

[7] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille.
Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets and fully
connected crfs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.7062, 2014.

[8] S. Dodge and L. Karam. Understanding how image quality affects deep
neural networks. In Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX), 2016
Eighth International Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2016.

[9] A. Dosovitskiy, J. T. Springenberg, M. Riedmiller, and T. Brox. Dis-
criminative unsupervised feature learning with convolutional neural
networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
766–774, 2014.

[10] S. Gidaris and N. Komodakis. Object detection via a multi-region and
semantic segmentation-aware cnn model. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1134–1142, 2015.
[11] S. Gidaris and N. Komodakis. Locnet: Improving localization accuracy
the IEEE Conference on
In Proceedings of

for object detection.
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 789–798, 2016.
[12] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik. Rich feature
hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation.
In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 580–587, 2014.

[13] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image

recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03385, 2015.

[14] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.

[15] G. B. Huang and E. Learned-Miller. Labeled faces in the wild: Updates
and new reporting procedures. Technical Report UM-CS-2014-003,
2014.

[16] G. B. Huang, M. Ramesh, T. Berg, and E. Learned-Miller. Labeled faces
in the wild: A database for studying face recognition in unconstrained
environments. Technical report, Technical Report 07-49, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, 2007.

[17] F. N. Iandola, S. Han, M. W. Moskewicz, K. Ashraf, W. J. Dally,
and K. Keutzer. SqueezeNet: AlexNet-level accuracy with 50x fewer
parameters and¡ 0.5 mb model size. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360,
2016.

[18] A. K. Jain and S. Z. Li. Handbook of face recognition. Springer, 2011.
[19] S. Karahan, M. K. Yildirum, K. Kirtac, F. S. Rende, G. Butun, and
H. K. Ekenel. How image degradations affect deep CNN-based face
In Biometrics Special Interest Group (BIOSIG), 2016
recognition?
International Conference of the, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2016.

[20] V. Kazemi and J. Sullivan. One millisecond face alignment with an
ensemble of regression trees. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1867–1874, 2014.
[21] D. P. Kingma and J. L. Ba. Adam: a method for stochastic optimization.
In International Conference on Learning Representation, 2015.
[22] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation
In Advances in neural

with deep convolutional neural networks.
information processing systems, pages 1097–1105, 2012.

[23] K. Lenc and A. Vedaldi. Understanding image representations by
In Proceedings of the
measuring their equivariance and equivalence.
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
991–999, 2015.

[24] G. Li and Y. Yu. Deep contrast learning for salient object detection.
In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), June 2016.

[25] N. Liu and J. Han. DHSNet: Deep hierarchical saliency network for
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on

salient object detection.
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 678–686, 2016.
[26] M. Mehdipour Ghazi and H. Kemal Ekenel. A comprehensive analysis of
deep learning based representation for face recognition. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops, pages 34–41, 2016.

[27] O. M. Parkhi, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman. Deep face recognition. In

BMVC, volume 1, page 6, 2015.

[28] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun. Faster R-CNN: Towards real-
In Advances in

time object detection with region proposal networks.
neural information processing systems, pages 91–99, 2015.

[29] B. RichardWebster, S. E. Anthony, and W. J. Scheirer. PsyPhy: A
psychophysics driven evaluation framework for visual recognition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.06448, 2016.

[30] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma,
Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large
scale visual recognition challenge. International Journal of Computer
Vision, pages 1–42, 2014.

[31] F. Schroff, D. Kalenichenko, and J. Philbin.

FaceNet: A uni-
arXiv preprint

ﬁed embedding for face recognition and clustering.
arXiv:1503.03832, 2015.

[32] A. Sharif Razavian, H. Azizpour, J. Sullivan, and S. Carlsson. CNN
In Pro-
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern

features off-the-shelf: an astounding baseline for recognition.
ceedings of
Recognition Workshops, pages 806–813, 2014.

SUBMITTED FOR PUBLICATION TO IET BIOMETRICS

11

[33] A. Sharma, O. Tuzel, and D. W. Jacobs. Deep hierarchical parsing for
semantic segmentation. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 530–538, 2015.

[34] Y. Sun, Y. Chen, X. Wang, and X. Tang. Deep learning face rep-
In Advances in Neural

resentation by joint identiﬁcation-veriﬁcation.
Information Processing Systems, pages 1988–1996, 2014.

[35] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan,
V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 1–9, 2015.

[36] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna. Rethinking
In Proceedings of the
the inception architecture for computer vision.
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
2818–2826, 2016.

[37] Y. Taigman, M. Yang, M. Ranzato, and L. Wolf. DeepFace: Closing the
gap to human-level performance in face veriﬁcation. In CVPR, pages
1701–1708. IEEE, 2014.

[38] L. Wang, W. Ouyang, X. Wang, and H. Lu. STCT: Sequentially training
convolutional networks for visual tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1373–
1381, 2016.

[39] N. Wang and D.-Y. Yeung. Learning a deep compact image representa-
tion for visual tracking. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 809–817, 2013.

[40] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional
networks. In European Conference on Computer Vision–ECCV, pages
818–833, 2014.

