Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

Aniol Lidon
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Catalonia/Spain

Marc Bolaños
Universitat de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
marc.bolanos@ub.edu

Mariella Dimiccoli
Universitat de Barcelona
Computer Vision Center
Barcelona, Spain
mariella.dimiccolig@cvc.uab.es

Petia Radeva
Universitat de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
petia.radeva@ub.edu

Maite Garolera
Consorci Sanitari de Terrassa
Terrassa, Spain
maite.garolera@cst.cat

Xavier Giro-i-Nieto
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Catalonia/Spain
xavier.giro@upc.edu

7
1
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
1
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
8
3
4
0
0
.
1
1
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
With the rapid increase of users of wearable cameras in recent
years and of the amount of data they produce, there is a strong
need for automatic retrieval and summarization techniques. This
work addresses the problem of automatically summarizing egocen-
tric photo streams captured through a wearable camera by taking
an image retrieval perspective. After removing non-informative
images by a new CNN-based filter, images are ranked by rele-
vance to ensure semantic diversity and finally re-ranked by a nov-
elty criterion to reduce redundancy. To assess the results, a new
evaluation metric is proposed which takes into account the non-
uniqueness of the solution. Experimental results applied on a data-
base of 7,110 images from 6 different subjects and evaluated by
experts gave 95.74% of experts satisfaction and a Mean Opinion
Score of 4.57 out of 5.0. Source code to reproduce this work is
available at https://github.com/imatge-upc/egocentric-2017-lta.

ACM Reference format:
Aniol Lidon, Marc Bolaños, Mariella Dimiccoli, Petia Radeva, Maite Garolera,
and Xavier Giro-i-Nieto. 2017. Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo
Stream Events. In Proceedings of LTA’17, Mountain View, CA, USA, October
23, 2017, 9 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3133202.3133204

1 INTRODUCTION
From smartphones to wearable devices, digital cameras are becom-
ing ubiquitous. This process is being accompanied by the progres-
sive reduction of digital storage cost, making it possible to collect
large amounts of high-quality pictures in a easy and affordable way.
This situation arises a number of natural questions: how to manage
this large amount of pictures? Do we really need to store all of
them? Summarization, the process of generating a proper, compact
and meaningful representation of a given image collection through
a subset of representative images, is crucial to help managing and

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA
© 2017 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5503-2/17/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3133202.3133204

Figure 1: Example of temporal neighbouring images ac-
quired by a wearable photo camera.

browsing efficiently large volumes of video content. Although sum-
marization is not a new research topic in Computer Vision [13, 29],
it is still a largely open problem.

Our goal in this paper is to address the summarization prob-
lem focusing on a particular scenario: the one of analyzing photo
streams acquired through a wearable camera. Motivation for this
work is given by the explosion of the number of wearable camera
users in recent years and, consequently, by the huge amount of
data they produce. To record daily experiences from an egocentric,
first-person perspective is a trend that has been growing progres-
sively since 1998, when Steve Mann proposed the WearCam [23]. In
2000, Mayol et al. proposed a necklace-like lifelogging device [24]
and, in 2006, Microsoft Research started to commercialize the first
egocentric lifelogging portable camera, the SenseCam, for research
purposes [14].

Several authors [21, 27, 28, 31] have studied the benefits of lifel-
ogging cues such as egocentric images to help people with dementia
to enhance their memory or to help them remember about their
forgotten past. Sellen et al. [31] showed that episodic details from
a visual ’lifelog’ can be presented to users as memory cues to assist
them in remembering the details of their original experience. To
support people with dementia, Piasek et al. [27] introduced the
"SenseCam Therapy" as a therapeutic approach similar to the well
established "Cognitive Stimulation Theraphy" [33]. Participants
were asked to wear SenseCam in order to collect images of events
from their everyday lives, then images were reviewed with a trained
therapist.

However, lifelogging technologies produce huge amounts of
data (thousands of images per day) that should be reviewed by
both patients and caregivers. To be efficient, lifelogging systems
need to summarize the most relevant information in the images. On
the other hand, in order to make possible the recording of images
from the whole day, it is necessary to use wearable cameras with
low temporal resolution (2 fpm). The peculiarity of these image
collections is that, due to the low-temporal resolution of the camera

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

and to the free motion of its wearer, temporally adjacent images may
be very different in appearance even if they belong to the same event
and should therefore be grouped together. For instance, during a
meeting, the people the camera wearer is interacting with and the
objects around them may change their position and frequently
appear occluded (see Fig. 1).

As a consequence of this, taking the semantics into account is
crucial to summarize egocentric sequences acquired by a low tempo-
ral resolution camera. This paper proposes a method to summarize
each of the events present in a daily egocentric sequence, aiming
at preserving semantic information and diversity, while reducing
the total number of images. The method consists of three major
steps: first, non-informative images are removed; second, they are
ranked by semantic relevance; and finally, a new re-rank is applied
by enforcing diversity among the chosen subset of pictures. Our
contributions can be summarized as follows:

(1) Propose a CNN-based informativeness estimator for egocen-

tric images.

images.

(2) Define a set of semantic relevance criteria for egocentric

(3) Formulate the summarization task as a retrieval problem by
combining informativeness, relevance and novelty criteria.
(4) Define a soft metric to assess the novelty from partially

annotated image datasets.

(5) Our results have been validated by medical experts with
the aim of being used in a cognitive training framework
to reinforce the memory of patients with mild cognitive
impairment.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the next section
reviews the related work, section 3 details the proposed method,
section 4 describes our experimental setup, section 5 presents the
experimental results and finally, section 6 ends the paper with some
concluding remarks. Source code to reproduce this work is available
at https://github.com/imatge-upc/egocentric-2017-lta.

2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Summarization by key-frame selection in

Lifelogging

Egocentric photo stream summarization has been traditionally for-
mulated as the problem of grouping lifelog images into coherent
collections (or events) by: first, extracting low-level spatio-temporal
features and then, selecting the most representative image from
each event. In this spirit, many authors proposed different strate-
gies for temporal segmentation and key-frame selection. Doherty
et al. [10] proposed a key-frame selection technique, which seeks to
select the image with the highest ’quality’ as key-frame by relying
on five types of features: contrast, color variance, global sharpness,
noise, saliency and external sensors data (accelerometers and light).
In addition to image quality, Blighe et al. [2] considered image sim-
ilarity to select a key-frame in an event. Basically, after applying
an image quality filter that removes all poor quality images, they
selected the image which has the highest average similarity to all
other images in the event as the key-frame. In that case, similarity
was measured relying on the distance of SIFT descriptors. In [18],
the key-frame is selected by a nearest neighbour ratio strategy that

favors high quality images and, if the difference in quality is not
large enough, favors images closer to the middle of the temporal
segment. More recently, the auhors in [3] proposed to use a Random
Walk for selecting a single and most representative image for each
temporal segment.

While these methods rely solely on low-level or mid-level fea-
tures for the temporal segmentation and key-frame detection, a
few recent works have introduced a higher semantic level in the
selection process for video cameras. Although, in this cases, due to
the higher temporal resolution of the camera (about 30fps), aiming
at selecting subshots (short video sub-sequences) instead of unique
key-frames. Lu and Grauman [22] and lately Ghosh et al. [11] sug-
gested that video summarization should preserve the narrative
character of a visual lifelog and, therefore, it should ideally be made
of a coherent chain of video subshots in which each subshot influ-
ences the next through some subset of key visual objects. Following
this idea, in [11, 22], first important people and objects are discov-
ered based on their interaction time with the camera wearer and
then, a subshot selection driven by key-object event occurrences is
applied. Subshot selection is performed by incorporating into an
objective function a term corresponding to the influence between
subshots as well as image diversity. To model diversity, the authors
relied on GIST descriptors and color histograms to model scenes
and proposed a measure of diversity that is high when the scenes
in sequential subshots are dissimilar to ensure visual uniqueness.
Visual diversity in lifelog summaries is modeled in [1] through
the concept of novelty, which the authors heuristically defined as
the deviation from some standard background. According to this
definition, novelty is detected based on the absence of a good reg-
istration, in terms of ego-motion and the environment, between a
new sequence and stored reference sequences. More recently, Gong
et al. [12] proposed the so called Sequential Determinantal Point
Process (seqDPP) approach for video summarization, a probabilistic
model with the ability to teach the system how to select informa-
tive and diverse subsets from human-created summaries, so as to
best fit human-perception quality based on evaluation metrics. This
work is an adaptation to sequences of [20], which is able to capture
the strong dependency structures between items in sequences. It
is worth to mention that all these works have been conceived to
deal with video data, where, assuming that the temporal segmenta-
tion is good, temporal coherence and frame redundancy make the
key-frame selection process easier.

2.2 Diversity and novelty in information

retrieval

One of the first works that tried to approach the problem of obtain-
ing a diverse set of elements was presented in 1998 by Carbonell &
Goldstain [4]. Their proposal, which was applied to the context of
text retrieval and summarization, aimed at obtaining results highly
relevant for the query, but presenting a low redundancy. They de-
fine the marginal relevance as the linear combination of relevance
and novelty, measured independently. They aimed at maximizing it
iteratively, defining this way what they call the Maximal Marginal
Relevance (MMR).

A similar formulation to MMR of the diversification problem was
given more recently by Deselaers et al. [8] in the problem of image

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

Figure 2: General scheme of our event summarization methodology.

retrieval. Likewise, they jointly optimized the relevance and the
diversity of the query, although reformulating the general solution
by incorporating dynamic programming techniques to the initial
proposal.

Diversity in social image retrieval was one of the focus of the Me-
diaEval 2013, 2014 and 2015 benchmarks and attracted the interest
of many groups working in this area. Most participants developed
diversification approaches that combined clustering with a key-
frame selection strategy to extract representative images for each
cluster. Spyromitros et al. proposed an MMR-based approach [34]
that jointly considers relevance and diversity, but using a super-
vised classification model to obtain the relevance scores learned
from the user feedback. The contribution from Dang-Nguyen et al.
[6] was to filter out non-relevant images at the beginning of the
process before applying diversity, hence simplifying it.

In [32], the authors presented a method for detecting and resolv-
ing the ambiguity of a query based on the textual features of the
image collection. If a query has an ambiguous nature, this ambigu-
ity should be reflected in the diversity of the result to increase user
satisfaction. Leuken et al. [37] proposed to reduce the ambiguity
of results provided by image search engines relying on textual de-
scriptions by seeking for the visual diversification of image search
results. This is achieved by clustering the retrieved images based
on their visual similarity and by selecting a representative image
for each cluster. In these works ’diversity’ is aimed at addressing
the ’ambiguity’ of the textual descriptions (tags) in queries rather
than avoiding redundancy in search results. The same terminol-
ogy is used by [5], where the term ’novelty’ is meant to address
redundancy in the retrieved documents. In this work we will use
the terms novelty and diversity as defined in [5].

3 METHODOLOGY
Inspired by the image retrieval work, we question which would be
the most suitable diversity and relevance criteria applied on ego-
centric images that kept the narrative character of the visual lifelog.
Taking into account that the images are acquired non-intentionally,
it is important to disregard the non-informative images (see Section
3.1) and keep the minimal set that represents the visual event. In
this section, we explain the four main steps applied to construct
the final resulting summary (see Fig. 2):

(1) Informativeness Filtering (Section 3.1): egocentric images
are acquired non-intentionally and therefore, many of them may be
non-informative, capturing neither (or partially) objects nor people,
or being blurred or dark. By means of a CNN-based informativeness
filtering method, we discard most of the non-informative images
from the egocentric event.

(2) Relevance and Diversity-aware Ranking (Section 3.2): an
initial relevance image ranking is computed taking into account
different criteria such as Saliency and Objectness for dealing with
the ambiguity or under-specification of queries like What is the user
doing?, or Where is the user?, and Face Detection for answering the
question With whom is the user most likely interacting?.

(3) Novelty-based Re-ranking (Section 3.3): a final re-ranking
based on a novelty-maximization procedure is applied on the images
already ranked by relevance. This step is crucial to select those
images that represent the most varied set of concepts appearing
avoiding redundancy without semantic loss.

(4) Estimation of Fusion Weights with Mean Sum of Max-
imal Similarities (Section 3.4): in this step, we define a novel soft
metric, which we call Mean Sum of Maximal Similarities (MSMS),
in order to define the priorities of the different relevance terms and
construct the final summary.

3.1 Informativeness Filtering
Considering both the free motion of egocentric cameras and the
non-intentionality of the pictures they take, several problems are in-
herent to them as over- or under-light exposure, blurriness, pictures
of the sky or ground, pictures where possible objects of interest
are badly centered in the image or even non-existent, etc. Such
images are considered as non-informative pictures. A way to avoid
a good amount of the undesired images in the final summary and
also to boost the performance of the next steps in our methodology,
would be being able to discriminate the informative pictures. Fig.
3 illustrates informative vs. non-informative photos taken by the
wearable camera.

In order to learn a model of informative pictures, and taking
into account the complexity of distinguishing visually whether an
image is informative enough or not, we propose training a CNN
for a binary problem. Thus, all the images with an undesired ar-
tifact (empty image, blurred image, image with small amount of
information, image where something occludes most of the image

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

Figure 3: Examples of informative images (top) and non-
informative images (bottom) belonging to the same events.
Faces appearing in the images have been manually blurred
for privacy concerns.

Figure 4: Images acquired by a lifelogging device, where ob-
jects of interest appear like: computer, mobile, coffee, hand,
bicycle, person, face, flower, apple, etc.

region, sky, ground, ceiling, room wall, etc.) will be considered
non-informative (label 0), and the rest (images with semantic con-
tent) will be considered informative (label 1). With this procedure,
we will be able to extract an informativeness score for each image
and filter the unuseful ones. In order to remove as many images
as possible, but with the ultimate goal of having a very high re-
call (always try to keep any informative image for the next steps),
we only discard the images with in f ormativenessScore < 0.025,
which correspond to the ones that are considered non-informative
for certain by the CNN (see experimental results in section 5.1).

The network training for the binary class distinction is performed
by fine-tuning the CaffeNet [19] pre-trained on the ImageNet [7]
dataset, provided in the software Caffe [17].

3.2 Relevance and Diversity-aware Ranking
Once non-informative images are discarded, we proceed to rank
the remaining images by considering a relevance criteria. Our so-
lution formulates the summarization problem in similar terms as
in information retrieval. A ranked list of event frames is generated
in such a way that a summary of T images directly corresponds to
a truncation of the ranked list of N elements at its T -th position.
Classic retrieval problems build their ranked lists as a response
to a user query, in the summarization of events, this query would
correspond to: Select T images to describe the event depicted into
these N frames. This query is highly ambiguous as an event can be
described from different perspectives. For example, an egocentric vi-
sual summary of an event may respond to multiple intentions, such
as: Where is the user? What activity is the user performing? With
whom is the user interacting? We hypothesize that the relevance of
each image with respect to these questions can be estimated with
computer vision tools for saliency prediction, detection of objects
and detection of faces.

3.2.1

Saliency Prediction for image relevance. We assume that
images with more salient content are relevant and should have a
higher probability to be included in the summary. Visual saliency

can be triggered by a broad range of reasons, such as objects, people
or characteristic features appearing in the picture. Many computer
vision algorithms try to estimate the fixation points of the human
eyes in a scene by means of saliency maps. These are heat maps of
the same size of the image, whose higher values correspond to the
image locations with a higher probability of capturing the human
visual attention.

In this work, we compute the saliency maps with SalNet [26], an
end-to-end convolutional network for saliency prediction. We adopt
the overall sum of the values in the saliency map as a quantitative
estimator of the image relevance.

3.2.2 Object Detection for image relevance. We assume that
those images containing objects are relevant since these objects
likely correspond to the ones the user is interacting with. These
objects would address the question of What is the user doing? (see
Fig. 4). In addition, introducing a semantic interpretation of the
scene, targets the summary from a higher abstraction level than
saliency maps.

In our work, we used the off-the-shelf tool Large Scale Detection
through Adaptation (LSDA) presented in [15]. This object detector is
based on a CNN fine-tuned for local scale and provides a semantic
label and a confidence score in the localization of the objects in the
scene.

This tool allows to estimate the relevance of each frame by sum-
ming the detection scores of all objects in the picture, so that the
frames with higher confidence detection will be considered as more
relevant.

3.2.3

Face Detection for image relevance. We assume that im-
ages containing people are also relevant, since these people likely
correspond to the ones the user is interacting with, and they would
be useful to answer the question With whom is the user interacting?.
Therefore, a face detector complements the object detector into
providing a cue for the user social interactions during the event.

In our solution, we adopted the off-the-shelf face detector by
Zhu et al. [39], which provides a confidence for each of the detected
faces. The relevance of each frame in terms of social interaction was
estimated by summing the confidence scores of the face detectors.
In the particular implementation of [39], detection scores may also
be described with negative values, so we actually used these scores
in an exponential sum, which conveniently deals with the negative
scores as well as encourages the selection of frames with multiple
detected faces.

3.2.4 Diversity-aware Ranking. The three criteria used for the
relevance detailed above allow to cope with the ambiguity of the
query, since they estimate the relevance from three different per-
spectives. The relevance scores computed for each case are then
used to build three ranked lists that will be combined into a single
one. This combination is based on generating a set of normalized
scores based simply on the position of the frames. Normalized scores
rk (x) are linearly distributed from the top (1 for most relevant) to
the bottom (0 for non relevant) of the ranked list as follows:

rk (x) = M − Rk (x)
M − 1
where Rk (x) = 1, . . . , M is the ranking position associated with
image x according to each relevance criterion k ∈ {1, 2, 3} and M

,

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

is the number of informative frames in the event, being M < N
and N the total number of images in the event. The standard score
normalization [25, 30] with the min and max scores was also tested
giving similar results, so the rank-based normalization was adopted
to save computational resources.

3.3 Novelty-based Re-ranking
The relevance and diversity-aware ranked list sorts the informa-
tive images combining different criteria for relevance, but does
not explicitly cope with the redundancy in the information. Fur-
ther processing is necessary to maximize the novelty provided by
each image with respect to the rest in the summary. In information
retrieval, novelty is defined as a quality of a system that avoids
redundancy [5]. In our approach for building a summary by trun-
cating a ranked list of images, introducing novelty implies that
each image in the list should differ as much as possible from its
predecessors.

Our approach adopts the greedy selection algorithm presented
by Deselaers et. al [9] to re-rank the fused list based on novelty. The
goal of our summarization algorithm is to analyze the input set of
informative and ranked images X = {x1, ...xM } to iteratively build
another set with minimal redundancy, say YT = {xy1 , ...xyT },
where T ≤ M. Our approach starts by selecting the top ranked
image x1 in the diversity-aware ranked list as the first element of
Y, that is Y1 = {xy1 }. The novelty of each candidate image, x ∗ to
be added to the summary at iteration t = 2, ...,T is defined as:

n(x ∗, Yt ) = 1 − s(x ∗, Yt ) = 1 − max
xyj ∈Yt

(1)
s(x ∗, xyj ) is a normalized similarity measure between the candidate
x ∗ and image xyj . In this way, the more different a new image is
with respect to the ones in Yt , the higher its novelty is.

s(x ∗, xyj )

In our work, the similarity s(x ∗, xyj ) is based on visual appear-
ance. Each image is described by a feature vector corresponding
to the seventh fully-connected layer of the CaffeNet convolutional
neural network [17], which was also used as initialization for the
informativeness (see section 3.1), and whose architecture was in-
spired by AlexNet [19] and trained with the ImageNet dataset [7].
The similarity score is computed with the Euclidean distance of the
feature vectors.

The summary of the event is built by combining the relevance
and the novelty of the candidate frames, x ∗. A greedy selection
algorithm iteratively chooses the next image in the summary as:

(r (x ∗) + n(x ∗, Yt )),

xyt +1

= arg max
x ∗ ∈X\Yt

Yt +1 = Yt ∪ {xyt +1 }

(2)

that is, the image with the highest sum of relevance and novelty.
We detail the computation of r (x ∗) in Equation (4).

3.4 Estimation of Fusion Weights with Mean

Sum of Maximal Similarities

Different relevance criteria would have different importance for
the final ranking. To this aim, we propose a novel approach to
estimate the priorities of each criterion and fuse them, based on
comparing the similarity of the images from a validation set of

Figure 5: Visual representation of the Sum of Max Similari-
ties when comparing the first T = 3 images from the ranked
list with the P = 3 red, green and blue images from the valida-
tion set. The similarity between images from the validation
set and images from the ranked list is represented as a T × P
matrix of gray level squares, where each square (i, j) of the
matrix represents the similarity between the image i from
the ranked list and the image j from the validation set. High
intensity gray level values indicate high similarity.

P elements V = {xv1 , ..., xvP } with a summary of T elements
YT = {xy1 , ...xyT }.

The Sum of Maximal Similarities (SMS) of V with respect to YT

is defined as:

SMS(V, YT ) = 1
P

P
(cid:213)

i=1

s(xvi , YT )

(3)

where s(xvi , YT ) is the similarity of image xvi from the validation
set with respect to YT . Following this metric, the more similar is
the validation set V to the selected images YT , the highest the
average similarity.

The main advantage of our soft metric presented in Equation
(3) is that automatic summaries, which are very similar to the
validation images, although do not coincide, still will be assessed as
a valid solution. This feature of our soft metric is specially important
when working with sequences of egocentric photo streams, that
usually contain a high amount of redundancy.

Our summaries are built as a truncation of a ranked list, so the
value of SMS depends on T . Fig. 5 shows a schematic example,
where a validation set composed of P = 3 images (represented by
three colors: green, blue and red) is compared with an event of
M = 5 images, which have been previously filtered and ranked
based on our diversity and novelty-aware criterion. In this example,
a summary with T = 3 images is considered. Let us imagine that the
green image from V is matched with the third one in the ranked
list, while the blue and red images are matched with the second
one.

Notice that, as in our set up the validation set V is always a
subset of the input set X, hence, the final average similarity (i.e.
considering the whole sequence,T = M images) for YM will always

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

r (x) =

w(k) rk (x),

(4)

3
(cid:213)

k =1

and the final set of frames is obtained according to the updated
relevance and novelty criteria according to Equation (2).

4 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
4.1 Dataset
The dataset used for validation of our method was acquired with the
wearable camera Narrative Clip (www.getnarrative.com), which
takes a picture every 30 seconds (2 fpm). It is composed of 10 day
lifelogs from 5 different subjects, with a total of 7,110 images1.
Each day has been segmented in between 10 to 25 events manually,
although any automatic segmentation method can be used (e.g. [36]).
The event segmentation separated the pictures in a set of ordered
and relevant semantic events or segments. In this paper, we use this
segmentation as starting point for the semantic summarization.

In order to apply a quantitative evaluation of our method, each
day lifelog was annotated at two levels by psychologists in the
following way:

(1) GT Level 1 - Informativeness: positive or negative label
depending on whether the image is considered informative or non-
informative (see section 3.1). The proportion of images labeled as
informative is 61.22% of the complete dataset.

GT Level 2 - Grouping of similar images: all highly similar
informative images that belong to the same event are grouped
together (see section 3.2.4). This distinction, resembling the one
used in MediaEval 2014 Retrieving diverse social images challenge
[16], intends to provide a way of measuring how many different
clusters/groups from the ground truth are represented among the
results in the final diversity selection.

4.2 Semantic Assessment of Summaries
The assessment of visual summaries is a challenging task due to
the rich semantic content of the images and the ambiguity in the
evaluation criteria. In addition, human annotation is an expensive
resource, which becomes dramatically scarce, when dealing with
tasks that require expert annotations in the domain. In our case, the
ground truth annotations have been performed by psychologists
who defined the event’s summaries from an human-centered point
of view.

We addressed the challenge of summary assessment as follows:
starting from the daily events defined by the psychologists, the
automatic summaries were built for each of the events separately
by using the best configuration of our system. Later, the results
were presented in a blind taste test to the expert annotators.

4.2.1 Validation based on MSMS. The classical methods to eval-
uate summaries cannot be applied in our setup, because they require
the annotation of the full dataset. In a traditional case, each doc-
ument in the ground truth is labeled as relevant or non-relevant
for the summary and, in some cases, also clustered in groups of
redundant items that cover the same sub-topic. Such annotations
allow the definition of metrics like Precision [4] for relevance and

1The link to the dataset and its ground truth are prepared to be made public domain
when the article is published.

Figure 6: MSMS curves and AUC for each relevance criterion
used separately.

correspond to one. Actually, in the example of Fig. 5, SMS must
reach a value of one when all the ranked list is considered, that is,
when T = M.

Let us consider the evolution of the SMS of summary Y as the

parameter t grows (t = 1, 2, . . . , M) defined as:

SMS(V, Y) = {SMS(V, Y1), . . . , SMS(V, YM )}

We construct the SMS curves for all the validation set, interpolate
them, normalize them with respect to the length M of each sequence
and get the average of the curves, one curve for each event in the
validation set. The resulting curve represents the Mean Sum of
Maximal Similarities (MSMS).

Fig. 6 shows three examples of MSMS curves. The curve illus-
trates the evolution of the MSMS as a function of the percentage
of images covered by the visual summary. This curve is defined
over the X -axis representing the proportion of event images rep-
resented in the top t items in the list, that is, plotting the MSMS
over t/M, where M is the amount of already filtered images in the
event. In this way, the curves of events of different lengths M can
be compared on the same plot. The best MSMS curves are those
which reach higher values with the minimal amount of images in
the summary.

Note that the MSMS can be computed for the three relevance
criteria that can give as a quality of performance of each of them.
Hence, we introduce a final refinement in the fusion of the ranked
lists by estimating the confidence of each of the three relevance
criteria and using it to weight the corresponding relevance terms.
Thus, we leverage the contribution of each of the three relevance
criteria based on their stand-alone performance (see Fig. 6). This
weight corresponds to the normalized Area Under the Curve (AUC)
of the MSMS measure.

As a result, the fusion weight w(k) for the relevance criterion k

is estimated as:

w(k) =

AUC(k)
i=1 AUC(i)

.

(cid:205)3

Finally, the three normalized relevance scores associated to each
frame are aggregated with a weighted sum to obtain their fused
score r (x), as described by the following equation:

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

Cluster Recall (or subtopic-recall) [38] for diversity and/or novelty.
However, in other cases (like ours), only a small portion of the
dataset is annotated.

Given this limitation, following the framework of Subsection 3.3,
we propose an evaluation approach based on the similarity of the
images in the ground truth set G = {xд1 , ..., xдP }, when compared
to the automatic summary of T elements, YT = {xy1 , ...xyT }. In
this case, we apply the SMS, SMS(G, YT ) of ground truth G with
respect to the extracted summary, YT . As before, we obtain the
MSMS as the average value, when considering all events in the
dataset of the ground truth, which is finally plotted in the Y -axis
of our evaluation scores. Finally, the AUC is computed to obtain a
quantitative measure of each configuration for the summary.

4.2.2 Blind taste test. The resulting summaries are evaluated
with a blind taste test by the team of experts who generated the
ground truth summaries. This methodology, previously used in
[3, 22], shows different summaries from the same event to the
experts, so they can rate them from a comparative perspective. By
randomly changing the position of the different techniques at each
event, graders are unaware of what technique was used to generate
each of the summaries, guaranteeing this way that their judgments
are not biased towards any of the algorithm components.

The amount of images included in each summary corresponds
to the number of frames selected by the experts, when building the
ground truth summaries, that is, P = T . In this way, the summary
shown to the graders is a truncation of the final ranked list of
images. In our case, the experts decided the length of the automatic
summary to be a percentage of the length of the whole event. Note
that developing an automatic system to establish the length of the
summary is out of the scope of this paper.

Additionally, the selected images are sorted in the summary
according to their temporal time stamps. This final sorting helps
the user to reconstruct the story between the images to have a
better understanding of the event.

An online platform was developed for the experts to evaluate our
results. In a first round of questionnaires, we wanted to compare
the result of our diversity method using ImageNet or Places as a
similarity criterion (see Equation (1)). For each event, the question-
naire first shows all the images belonging to the event, and then
the user has to answer the questions Is the summary representative
of the event? and Which summary do you prefer? for each similarity
method (using ImageNet or Places).

On the second questionnaire the expert had to give a grade to
each of the presented ranked summaries. The three summaries
correspond respectively to: our approach, a uniform sampling of
images as a lower-bound example, and the ground truth summaries
constructed by the same experts two months earlier as an upper-
bound of the performance score. The order in which the different
summaries are shown is also randomly chosen for each event to
avoid again any bias due to the sorting.

In this case, a comparison between the three types of summaries
is obtained by asking the experts to grade each solution from 1
(worst) to 5 (best). This data collected allowed the computation of
the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) for each configuration (see section
5.3).

5 RESULTS
Two types of experiments validate the presented results: one for the
informativeness filtering and a second one using online question-
naires for the relevance, diversity and novelty on the final visual
summaries. In both cases, the evaluation was based on the feedback
provided by the experts.

5.1 Informativeness Filtering
To validate how successful is our algorithm to filter non-informative
frames, we applied a 10-fold (a day set out) cross-validation. For all
the experiments, we used the following parameters: base_lr = 10−8,
=
lr _policy = ”step”, дamma = 0.1, stepsize = 3000, blobs_lrf c6
=
= blobs_lrconv5×8 and blobs_lrf c8
blobs_lrconv5×5, blobs_lrf c7
blobs_lrconv5 × 10. In Table 1, we present the validation accuracy
obtained on each of the sets and the number of iterations applied to
achieve the best result. After having the networks trained for each
cross-validation, we evaluated the general average performance in
terms of Accuracy, Precision, Recall and F-Measure for different
informativeness score threshold values2. As we can see, we are able
to obtain the highest F-Measure value, when we filter images with
an in f ormativenessScore < 0.025. In Fig. 7, we show the Precision-
Recall curves for all thresholds, obtaining the best results with
respect to the F-Measure of: F Measure = 0.881, Accuracy = 0.846,
Precision = 0.84 and Recall = 0.926 with threshold = 0.05.

Figure 7: Precision-Recall curve for different informative-
ness score threshold values (a small subset of them are
shown in black dots) for all the sets.

5.2 Diversity
Fig. 8 illustrates qualitatively the differences obtained when in-
troducing diversity to the ranked list. As we can see, when we
introduce the novelty re-ranking step, we are able not only to ob-
tain a more visually acceptable set of images, but also to describe
with pictures everything that is happening during the whole event.
Thus, we are able to avoid focusing on a single set of high relevant
images that picture the same concept, activity or background.

2If the informativeness score of a sample is below the threshold, it will be considered
non-informative.

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

Table 1: Best validation accuracy on each set and the respective number of training iterations performed to achieve the results.
SubjX represents the anonymized sets for a given Subject.

Accuracy
Iteration #

SubjA1
0.759
3,600

SubjA2
0.841
1,000

SubjB1
0.805
3,600

SubjB2
0.795
3,400

SubjB3
0.799
3,800

SubjC1
0.837
2,600

SubjD1
0.805
2,200

SubjE1
0.867
3,600

SubjF1
0.795
2,400

SubjF2
0.897
18,000

53.19% of the times. The total adds more than 100% because some
summaries were identical for both configurations.

The second round of evaluations aimed to compare our solution
based on ImageNet features with a baseline of uniform sampling
and and upper-bound defined by the summaries in the ground truth.
Experts were asked to grade each visual summary from 1 (worse)
to 5 (best), so we could compute the Mean Opinion Score (MOS)
[35] of each solution. We adopted MOS as a metric given the highly
subjective and complex nature of the task.

Table 2: Mean Opinion Score for ImageNet, ground-truth
and uniform sampling summaries.

Our solution Ground-truth Uniform Sampling

4,57

4,94

3,99

The performance obtained by uniform sampling (3.99/5) is truly
commendable, since this score can be interpreted as a good solution.
The results obtained with our solution are also satisfactory, because
they are closer to the ground-truth than to the uniform sampling.
Experts have shown coherence with their ground-truth giving a
4.94 of Mean Opinion Score.

6 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we presented a novel approach for semantic summa-
rization of egocentric photo stream events, constructed as a ranked
list of general semantic criteria. Our method is based on two main
criteria: relevance to optimize semantic diversity in the summary,
and novelty to avoid redundancy in the final result. After applying a
pre-processing step to filter non-informative images through a new
CNN-based method, relevance diversity-aware ranking is obtained
by integrating state of the art techniques for saliency detection, ob-
ject recognition and face detection. This list is re-ranked to reduce
redundancy so that each image of the truncated list differs as much
as possible from its predecessors. We proposed a new soft metric to
rank the informative frames and construct the final summary that
does not penalize summaries equivalent (very similar, but not coin-
ciding exactly) to the ground truth. Experimental results indicate
high acceptance and satisfaction of psychologists achieving mean
opinion score of 4.57 out of 5.0.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by contracts SGR1219 and SGR1421 by
the Catalan AGAUR office, and TIN2012-38187-C03-01 and TEC2013-
43935-R by the Spanish Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad
and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF). We ac-
knowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation for the donation of
GPUs.

Figure 8: Three examples of the top 5 images obtained before
introducing diversity (uneven rows) and after introducing it
(even rows).

5.3 Ranking Summary Quality
The first round of blind taste tests posed two questions for each
event. Firstly, experts decided whether each presented summary
was representative, and secondly, they chose the preferred one
Given the question Is the summary representative of the event?, in
95.74% the experts agreed with our solution, using the ImageNet
features to compute the similarity in the novelty-based re-ranking.
Using the other alternative, features from Places CNN, the obtained
result was 94.33%. We conclude that our approach generates repre-
sentative summavery high portion of events.

The second question asked was: Which summary do you prefer?
and experts had to choose their preferred summary, allowing just
one answer. The solution based on Imagenet features was chosen
in 59.57% of teh cases, while the one based on Places was selected

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

REFERENCES
[1] Omid Aghazadeh, Josephine Sullivan, and Stefan Carlsson. 2011. Novelty detec-
tion from an ego-centric perspective. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2011 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 3297–3304.

[2] Michael Blighe, Aiden Doherty, Alan F. Smeaton, and Noel E. O’Connor. 2008.
Keyframe Detection in Visual Lifelogs. In Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments (PETRA
’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 55, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1389586.1389652

[3] Marc Bolaños, Ricard Mestre, Estefanía Talavera, Xavier Giró-i Nieto, and Petia
Radeva. 2015. Visual Summary of Egocentric Photostreams by Representative
Keyframes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.01130 (2015).

[4] Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The Use of MMR, Diversity-based
Reranking for Reordering Documents and Producing Summaries. In Proceedings of
the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’98). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 335–336. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/290941.291025

[5] Charles LA Clarke, Maheedhar Kolla, Gordon V Cormack, Olga Vechtomova,
Azin Ashkan, Stefan Büttcher, and Ian MacKinnon. 2008. Novelty and diversity
in information retrieval evaluation. In Proceedings of the 31st annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM,
659–666.

[6] Duc-Tien Dang-Nguyen, Luca Piras, Giorgio Giacinto, Giulia Boato, and FGB
De Natale. 2014. Retrieval of Diverse Images by Pre-filtering and Hierarchical
Clustering. Working Notes of MediaEval (2014).

[7] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. Ima-
genet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009. IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 248–255.

[8] Thomas Deselaers, Tobias Gass, Philippe Dreuw, and Hermann Ney. 2009. Jointly
Optimising Relevance and Diversity in Image Retrieval. In Proceedings of the
ACM International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval (CIVR ’09). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, Article 39, 8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1646396.1646443
[9] Thomas Deselaers, Tobias Gass, Philippe Dreuw, and Hermann Ney. 2009. Jointly
optimising relevance and diversity in image retrieval. In Proceedings of the ACM
international conference on image and video retrieval. ACM, 39.

[10] Aiden R. Doherty, Daragh Byrne, Alan F. Smeaton, Gareth J.F. Jones, and Mark
Hughes. 2008. Investigating Keyframe Selection Methods in the Novel Domain
of Passively Captured Visual Lifelogs. In Proceedings of the 2008 International
Conference on Content-based Image and Video Retrieval (CIVR ’08). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 259–268. https://doi.org/10.1145/1386352.1386389

[11] Joydeep Ghosh, Yong Jae Lee, and Kristen Grauman. 2012. Discovering important
people and objects for egocentric video summarization. In 2012 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE, 1346–1353.

[12] Boqing Gong, Wei-Lun Chao, Kristen Grauman, and Fei Sha. 2014. Di-
verse Sequential Subset Selection for Supervised Video Summarization.
In Advances
Information Processing Systems 27, Z. Ghahra-
mani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N.D. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger
(Eds.). Curran Associates,
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
5413-diverse-sequential-subset-selection-for-supervised-video-summarization.
pdf

Inc., 2069–2077.

in Neural

[13] Michael Gygli, Helmut Grabner, Hayko Riemenschneider, and Luc Van Gool.
2014. Creating summaries from user videos. In European conference on computer
vision. Springer, 505–520.

[14] Steve Hodges, Lyndsay Williams, Emma Berry, Shahram Izadi, James Srinivasan,
Alex Butler, Gavin Smyth, Narinder Kapur, and Ken Wood. 2006. SenseCam: A
Retrospective Memory Aid. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp’06). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 177–
193. https://doi.org/10.1007/11853565_11

[15] Judy Hoffman, Sergio Guadarrama, Eric Tzeng, Jeff Donahue, Ross B. Girshick,
Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. 2014. LSDA: Large Scale Detection Through
Adaptation. CoRR abs/1407.5035 (2014). http://arxiv.org/abs/1407.5035

[16] Bogdan Ionescu, Adrian Popescu, Mihai Lupu, Alexandru L Gınsca, and Henning
Müller. 2014. Retrieving diverse social images at mediaeval 2014: Challenge,
dataset and evaluation. In MediaEval 2014 Workshop, Barcelona, Spain.

[17] Yangqing Jia, Evan Shelhamer, Jeff Donahue, Sergey Karayev, Jonathan Long,
Ross Girshick, Sergio Guadarrama, and Trevor Darrell. 2014. Caffe: Convolutional
architecture for fast feature embedding. In Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Multimedia. ACM, 675–678.

[18] Amornched Jinda-Apiraksa, Jana Machajdik, and Robert Sablatnig. 2012. A
keyframe selection of lifelog image sequences. Erasmus Mundus M. Sc. in Visions
and Robotics thesis, Vienna University of Technology (TU Wien) (2012).

[19] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. 2012. Imagenet classifica-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems. 1097–1105.

[20] Alex Kulesza and Ben Taskar. 2012. Determinantal point processes for machine

learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.6083 (2012).

[21] Matthew L. Lee and Anind K. Dey. 2008. Lifelogging Memory Appliance for
People with Episodic Memory Impairment. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
44–53. https://doi.org/10.1145/1409635.1409643

[22] Zheng Lu and Kristen Grauman. 2013. Story-driven summarization for egocentric
video. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2013 IEEE Conference
on. IEEE, 2714–2721.

[23] S. Mann. 1998. ’WearCam’ (The wearable camera): personal imaging systems for
long-term use in wearable tetherless computer-mediated reality and personal
photo/videographic memory prosthesis. In Wearable Computers, 1998. Digest of
Papers. Second International Symposium on. 124–131. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ISWC.1998.729538

[24] W. W. Mayol, B. J. Tordoff, and D. W. Murray. 2002. Wearable Visual Robots.
Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 6, 1 (Jan. 2002), 37–48. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s007790200004

[25] Mark Montague and Javed A Aslam. 2001. Relevance score normalization for
metasearch. In Proceedings of the tenth international conference on Information
and knowledge management. ACM, 427–433.

[26] Junting Pan, Kevin McGuinness, and Xavier Giró-i Nieto. 2016. End-to-end

Convolutional Network for Saliency Prediction. In Submitted to CVPR.

[27] P. Piasek, K. Irving, and A.F. Smeaton. 2011. SenseCam intervention based on
Cognitive Stimulation Therapy framework for early-stage dementia. In Pervasive
Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2011 5th International
Conference on. 522–525.

[28] Paulina Piasek, Alan F Smeaton, et al. 2014. Using lifelogging to help construct

the identity of people with dementia. (2014).

[29] Sachan Priyamvada Rajendra and N Keshaveni. 2014. A survey of automatic
video summarization techniques. International Journal of Electronics, Electrical
and Computational System 2 (2014).

[30] M Elena Renda and Umberto Straccia. 2003. Web metasearch: rank vs. score
based rank aggregation methods. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM symposium on
Applied computing. ACM, 841–846.

[31] Abigail J. Sellen, Andrew Fogg, Mike Aitken, Steve Hodges, Carsten Rother, and
Ken Wood. 2007. Do Life-logging Technologies Support Memory for the Past?:
An Experimental Study Using Sensecam. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’07). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
81–90. https://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240636

[32] Kai Song, Yonghong Tian, Wen Gao, and Tiejun Huang. 2006. Diversifying the
Image Retrieval Results. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual ACM International
Conference on Multimedia (MULTIMEDIA ’06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 707–710.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1180639.1180789

[33] Aimee Spector, Lene Thorgrimsen, Bob Woods, Lindsay Royan, Steve Davies,
Margaret Butterworth (deceased), and Martin Orrell. 2003. Efficacy of an evidence-
based cognitive stimulation therapy programme for people with dementia. The
British Journal of Psychiatry 183, 3 (2003), 248–254. https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.
183.3.248

[34] Eleftherios Spyromitros-Xioufis, Symeon Papadopoulos, Yiannis Kompatsiaris,
and Ioannis Vlahavas. 2014. SocialSensor: Finding Diverse Images at MediaEval
2014. (2014).

[35] Robert C Streijl, Stefan Winkler, and David S Hands. 2016. Mean opinion score
(MOS) revisited: methods and applications, limitations and alternatives. Multi-
media Systems 22, 2 (2016), 213–227.

[36] Estefania Talavera, Mariella Dimiccoli, Marc Bolaños, Maedeh Aghaei, and Petia
Radeva. 2015. R-clustering for egocentric video segmentation. In Pattern Recog-
nition and Image Analysis. Springer, 327–336.

[37] Reinier H. van Leuken, Lluis Garcia, Ximena Olivares, and Roelof van Zwol.
2009. Visual Diversification of Image Search Results. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW ’09). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 341–350. https://doi.org/10.1145/1526709.1526756

[38] Cheng Xiang Zhai, William W Cohen, and John Lafferty. 2003. Beyond inde-
pendent relevance: methods and evaluation metrics for subtopic retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 26th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research
and development in informaion retrieval. ACM, 10–17.

[39] Xiangxin Zhu and Deva Ramanan. 2012. Face detection, pose estimation, and
landmark localization in the wild. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2012 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 2879–2886.

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

Aniol Lidon
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Catalonia/Spain

Marc Bolaños
Universitat de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
marc.bolanos@ub.edu

Mariella Dimiccoli
Universitat de Barcelona
Computer Vision Center
Barcelona, Spain
mariella.dimiccolig@cvc.uab.es

Petia Radeva
Universitat de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
petia.radeva@ub.edu

Maite Garolera
Consorci Sanitari de Terrassa
Terrassa, Spain
maite.garolera@cst.cat

Xavier Giro-i-Nieto
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Catalonia/Spain
xavier.giro@upc.edu

7
1
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
1
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
8
3
4
0
0
.
1
1
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
With the rapid increase of users of wearable cameras in recent
years and of the amount of data they produce, there is a strong
need for automatic retrieval and summarization techniques. This
work addresses the problem of automatically summarizing egocen-
tric photo streams captured through a wearable camera by taking
an image retrieval perspective. After removing non-informative
images by a new CNN-based filter, images are ranked by rele-
vance to ensure semantic diversity and finally re-ranked by a nov-
elty criterion to reduce redundancy. To assess the results, a new
evaluation metric is proposed which takes into account the non-
uniqueness of the solution. Experimental results applied on a data-
base of 7,110 images from 6 different subjects and evaluated by
experts gave 95.74% of experts satisfaction and a Mean Opinion
Score of 4.57 out of 5.0. Source code to reproduce this work is
available at https://github.com/imatge-upc/egocentric-2017-lta.

ACM Reference format:
Aniol Lidon, Marc Bolaños, Mariella Dimiccoli, Petia Radeva, Maite Garolera,
and Xavier Giro-i-Nieto. 2017. Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo
Stream Events. In Proceedings of LTA’17, Mountain View, CA, USA, October
23, 2017, 9 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3133202.3133204

1 INTRODUCTION
From smartphones to wearable devices, digital cameras are becom-
ing ubiquitous. This process is being accompanied by the progres-
sive reduction of digital storage cost, making it possible to collect
large amounts of high-quality pictures in a easy and affordable way.
This situation arises a number of natural questions: how to manage
this large amount of pictures? Do we really need to store all of
them? Summarization, the process of generating a proper, compact
and meaningful representation of a given image collection through
a subset of representative images, is crucial to help managing and

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA
© 2017 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5503-2/17/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3133202.3133204

Figure 1: Example of temporal neighbouring images ac-
quired by a wearable photo camera.

browsing efficiently large volumes of video content. Although sum-
marization is not a new research topic in Computer Vision [13, 29],
it is still a largely open problem.

Our goal in this paper is to address the summarization prob-
lem focusing on a particular scenario: the one of analyzing photo
streams acquired through a wearable camera. Motivation for this
work is given by the explosion of the number of wearable camera
users in recent years and, consequently, by the huge amount of
data they produce. To record daily experiences from an egocentric,
first-person perspective is a trend that has been growing progres-
sively since 1998, when Steve Mann proposed the WearCam [23]. In
2000, Mayol et al. proposed a necklace-like lifelogging device [24]
and, in 2006, Microsoft Research started to commercialize the first
egocentric lifelogging portable camera, the SenseCam, for research
purposes [14].

Several authors [21, 27, 28, 31] have studied the benefits of lifel-
ogging cues such as egocentric images to help people with dementia
to enhance their memory or to help them remember about their
forgotten past. Sellen et al. [31] showed that episodic details from
a visual ’lifelog’ can be presented to users as memory cues to assist
them in remembering the details of their original experience. To
support people with dementia, Piasek et al. [27] introduced the
"SenseCam Therapy" as a therapeutic approach similar to the well
established "Cognitive Stimulation Theraphy" [33]. Participants
were asked to wear SenseCam in order to collect images of events
from their everyday lives, then images were reviewed with a trained
therapist.

However, lifelogging technologies produce huge amounts of
data (thousands of images per day) that should be reviewed by
both patients and caregivers. To be efficient, lifelogging systems
need to summarize the most relevant information in the images. On
the other hand, in order to make possible the recording of images
from the whole day, it is necessary to use wearable cameras with
low temporal resolution (2 fpm). The peculiarity of these image
collections is that, due to the low-temporal resolution of the camera

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

and to the free motion of its wearer, temporally adjacent images may
be very different in appearance even if they belong to the same event
and should therefore be grouped together. For instance, during a
meeting, the people the camera wearer is interacting with and the
objects around them may change their position and frequently
appear occluded (see Fig. 1).

As a consequence of this, taking the semantics into account is
crucial to summarize egocentric sequences acquired by a low tempo-
ral resolution camera. This paper proposes a method to summarize
each of the events present in a daily egocentric sequence, aiming
at preserving semantic information and diversity, while reducing
the total number of images. The method consists of three major
steps: first, non-informative images are removed; second, they are
ranked by semantic relevance; and finally, a new re-rank is applied
by enforcing diversity among the chosen subset of pictures. Our
contributions can be summarized as follows:

(1) Propose a CNN-based informativeness estimator for egocen-

tric images.

images.

(2) Define a set of semantic relevance criteria for egocentric

(3) Formulate the summarization task as a retrieval problem by
combining informativeness, relevance and novelty criteria.
(4) Define a soft metric to assess the novelty from partially

annotated image datasets.

(5) Our results have been validated by medical experts with
the aim of being used in a cognitive training framework
to reinforce the memory of patients with mild cognitive
impairment.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the next section
reviews the related work, section 3 details the proposed method,
section 4 describes our experimental setup, section 5 presents the
experimental results and finally, section 6 ends the paper with some
concluding remarks. Source code to reproduce this work is available
at https://github.com/imatge-upc/egocentric-2017-lta.

2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Summarization by key-frame selection in

Lifelogging

Egocentric photo stream summarization has been traditionally for-
mulated as the problem of grouping lifelog images into coherent
collections (or events) by: first, extracting low-level spatio-temporal
features and then, selecting the most representative image from
each event. In this spirit, many authors proposed different strate-
gies for temporal segmentation and key-frame selection. Doherty
et al. [10] proposed a key-frame selection technique, which seeks to
select the image with the highest ’quality’ as key-frame by relying
on five types of features: contrast, color variance, global sharpness,
noise, saliency and external sensors data (accelerometers and light).
In addition to image quality, Blighe et al. [2] considered image sim-
ilarity to select a key-frame in an event. Basically, after applying
an image quality filter that removes all poor quality images, they
selected the image which has the highest average similarity to all
other images in the event as the key-frame. In that case, similarity
was measured relying on the distance of SIFT descriptors. In [18],
the key-frame is selected by a nearest neighbour ratio strategy that

favors high quality images and, if the difference in quality is not
large enough, favors images closer to the middle of the temporal
segment. More recently, the auhors in [3] proposed to use a Random
Walk for selecting a single and most representative image for each
temporal segment.

While these methods rely solely on low-level or mid-level fea-
tures for the temporal segmentation and key-frame detection, a
few recent works have introduced a higher semantic level in the
selection process for video cameras. Although, in this cases, due to
the higher temporal resolution of the camera (about 30fps), aiming
at selecting subshots (short video sub-sequences) instead of unique
key-frames. Lu and Grauman [22] and lately Ghosh et al. [11] sug-
gested that video summarization should preserve the narrative
character of a visual lifelog and, therefore, it should ideally be made
of a coherent chain of video subshots in which each subshot influ-
ences the next through some subset of key visual objects. Following
this idea, in [11, 22], first important people and objects are discov-
ered based on their interaction time with the camera wearer and
then, a subshot selection driven by key-object event occurrences is
applied. Subshot selection is performed by incorporating into an
objective function a term corresponding to the influence between
subshots as well as image diversity. To model diversity, the authors
relied on GIST descriptors and color histograms to model scenes
and proposed a measure of diversity that is high when the scenes
in sequential subshots are dissimilar to ensure visual uniqueness.
Visual diversity in lifelog summaries is modeled in [1] through
the concept of novelty, which the authors heuristically defined as
the deviation from some standard background. According to this
definition, novelty is detected based on the absence of a good reg-
istration, in terms of ego-motion and the environment, between a
new sequence and stored reference sequences. More recently, Gong
et al. [12] proposed the so called Sequential Determinantal Point
Process (seqDPP) approach for video summarization, a probabilistic
model with the ability to teach the system how to select informa-
tive and diverse subsets from human-created summaries, so as to
best fit human-perception quality based on evaluation metrics. This
work is an adaptation to sequences of [20], which is able to capture
the strong dependency structures between items in sequences. It
is worth to mention that all these works have been conceived to
deal with video data, where, assuming that the temporal segmenta-
tion is good, temporal coherence and frame redundancy make the
key-frame selection process easier.

2.2 Diversity and novelty in information

retrieval

One of the first works that tried to approach the problem of obtain-
ing a diverse set of elements was presented in 1998 by Carbonell &
Goldstain [4]. Their proposal, which was applied to the context of
text retrieval and summarization, aimed at obtaining results highly
relevant for the query, but presenting a low redundancy. They de-
fine the marginal relevance as the linear combination of relevance
and novelty, measured independently. They aimed at maximizing it
iteratively, defining this way what they call the Maximal Marginal
Relevance (MMR).

A similar formulation to MMR of the diversification problem was
given more recently by Deselaers et al. [8] in the problem of image

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

Figure 2: General scheme of our event summarization methodology.

retrieval. Likewise, they jointly optimized the relevance and the
diversity of the query, although reformulating the general solution
by incorporating dynamic programming techniques to the initial
proposal.

Diversity in social image retrieval was one of the focus of the Me-
diaEval 2013, 2014 and 2015 benchmarks and attracted the interest
of many groups working in this area. Most participants developed
diversification approaches that combined clustering with a key-
frame selection strategy to extract representative images for each
cluster. Spyromitros et al. proposed an MMR-based approach [34]
that jointly considers relevance and diversity, but using a super-
vised classification model to obtain the relevance scores learned
from the user feedback. The contribution from Dang-Nguyen et al.
[6] was to filter out non-relevant images at the beginning of the
process before applying diversity, hence simplifying it.

In [32], the authors presented a method for detecting and resolv-
ing the ambiguity of a query based on the textual features of the
image collection. If a query has an ambiguous nature, this ambigu-
ity should be reflected in the diversity of the result to increase user
satisfaction. Leuken et al. [37] proposed to reduce the ambiguity
of results provided by image search engines relying on textual de-
scriptions by seeking for the visual diversification of image search
results. This is achieved by clustering the retrieved images based
on their visual similarity and by selecting a representative image
for each cluster. In these works ’diversity’ is aimed at addressing
the ’ambiguity’ of the textual descriptions (tags) in queries rather
than avoiding redundancy in search results. The same terminol-
ogy is used by [5], where the term ’novelty’ is meant to address
redundancy in the retrieved documents. In this work we will use
the terms novelty and diversity as defined in [5].

3 METHODOLOGY
Inspired by the image retrieval work, we question which would be
the most suitable diversity and relevance criteria applied on ego-
centric images that kept the narrative character of the visual lifelog.
Taking into account that the images are acquired non-intentionally,
it is important to disregard the non-informative images (see Section
3.1) and keep the minimal set that represents the visual event. In
this section, we explain the four main steps applied to construct
the final resulting summary (see Fig. 2):

(1) Informativeness Filtering (Section 3.1): egocentric images
are acquired non-intentionally and therefore, many of them may be
non-informative, capturing neither (or partially) objects nor people,
or being blurred or dark. By means of a CNN-based informativeness
filtering method, we discard most of the non-informative images
from the egocentric event.

(2) Relevance and Diversity-aware Ranking (Section 3.2): an
initial relevance image ranking is computed taking into account
different criteria such as Saliency and Objectness for dealing with
the ambiguity or under-specification of queries like What is the user
doing?, or Where is the user?, and Face Detection for answering the
question With whom is the user most likely interacting?.

(3) Novelty-based Re-ranking (Section 3.3): a final re-ranking
based on a novelty-maximization procedure is applied on the images
already ranked by relevance. This step is crucial to select those
images that represent the most varied set of concepts appearing
avoiding redundancy without semantic loss.

(4) Estimation of Fusion Weights with Mean Sum of Max-
imal Similarities (Section 3.4): in this step, we define a novel soft
metric, which we call Mean Sum of Maximal Similarities (MSMS),
in order to define the priorities of the different relevance terms and
construct the final summary.

3.1 Informativeness Filtering
Considering both the free motion of egocentric cameras and the
non-intentionality of the pictures they take, several problems are in-
herent to them as over- or under-light exposure, blurriness, pictures
of the sky or ground, pictures where possible objects of interest
are badly centered in the image or even non-existent, etc. Such
images are considered as non-informative pictures. A way to avoid
a good amount of the undesired images in the final summary and
also to boost the performance of the next steps in our methodology,
would be being able to discriminate the informative pictures. Fig.
3 illustrates informative vs. non-informative photos taken by the
wearable camera.

In order to learn a model of informative pictures, and taking
into account the complexity of distinguishing visually whether an
image is informative enough or not, we propose training a CNN
for a binary problem. Thus, all the images with an undesired ar-
tifact (empty image, blurred image, image with small amount of
information, image where something occludes most of the image

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

Figure 3: Examples of informative images (top) and non-
informative images (bottom) belonging to the same events.
Faces appearing in the images have been manually blurred
for privacy concerns.

Figure 4: Images acquired by a lifelogging device, where ob-
jects of interest appear like: computer, mobile, coffee, hand,
bicycle, person, face, flower, apple, etc.

region, sky, ground, ceiling, room wall, etc.) will be considered
non-informative (label 0), and the rest (images with semantic con-
tent) will be considered informative (label 1). With this procedure,
we will be able to extract an informativeness score for each image
and filter the unuseful ones. In order to remove as many images
as possible, but with the ultimate goal of having a very high re-
call (always try to keep any informative image for the next steps),
we only discard the images with in f ormativenessScore < 0.025,
which correspond to the ones that are considered non-informative
for certain by the CNN (see experimental results in section 5.1).

The network training for the binary class distinction is performed
by fine-tuning the CaffeNet [19] pre-trained on the ImageNet [7]
dataset, provided in the software Caffe [17].

3.2 Relevance and Diversity-aware Ranking
Once non-informative images are discarded, we proceed to rank
the remaining images by considering a relevance criteria. Our so-
lution formulates the summarization problem in similar terms as
in information retrieval. A ranked list of event frames is generated
in such a way that a summary of T images directly corresponds to
a truncation of the ranked list of N elements at its T -th position.
Classic retrieval problems build their ranked lists as a response
to a user query, in the summarization of events, this query would
correspond to: Select T images to describe the event depicted into
these N frames. This query is highly ambiguous as an event can be
described from different perspectives. For example, an egocentric vi-
sual summary of an event may respond to multiple intentions, such
as: Where is the user? What activity is the user performing? With
whom is the user interacting? We hypothesize that the relevance of
each image with respect to these questions can be estimated with
computer vision tools for saliency prediction, detection of objects
and detection of faces.

3.2.1

Saliency Prediction for image relevance. We assume that
images with more salient content are relevant and should have a
higher probability to be included in the summary. Visual saliency

can be triggered by a broad range of reasons, such as objects, people
or characteristic features appearing in the picture. Many computer
vision algorithms try to estimate the fixation points of the human
eyes in a scene by means of saliency maps. These are heat maps of
the same size of the image, whose higher values correspond to the
image locations with a higher probability of capturing the human
visual attention.

In this work, we compute the saliency maps with SalNet [26], an
end-to-end convolutional network for saliency prediction. We adopt
the overall sum of the values in the saliency map as a quantitative
estimator of the image relevance.

3.2.2 Object Detection for image relevance. We assume that
those images containing objects are relevant since these objects
likely correspond to the ones the user is interacting with. These
objects would address the question of What is the user doing? (see
Fig. 4). In addition, introducing a semantic interpretation of the
scene, targets the summary from a higher abstraction level than
saliency maps.

In our work, we used the off-the-shelf tool Large Scale Detection
through Adaptation (LSDA) presented in [15]. This object detector is
based on a CNN fine-tuned for local scale and provides a semantic
label and a confidence score in the localization of the objects in the
scene.

This tool allows to estimate the relevance of each frame by sum-
ming the detection scores of all objects in the picture, so that the
frames with higher confidence detection will be considered as more
relevant.

3.2.3

Face Detection for image relevance. We assume that im-
ages containing people are also relevant, since these people likely
correspond to the ones the user is interacting with, and they would
be useful to answer the question With whom is the user interacting?.
Therefore, a face detector complements the object detector into
providing a cue for the user social interactions during the event.

In our solution, we adopted the off-the-shelf face detector by
Zhu et al. [39], which provides a confidence for each of the detected
faces. The relevance of each frame in terms of social interaction was
estimated by summing the confidence scores of the face detectors.
In the particular implementation of [39], detection scores may also
be described with negative values, so we actually used these scores
in an exponential sum, which conveniently deals with the negative
scores as well as encourages the selection of frames with multiple
detected faces.

3.2.4 Diversity-aware Ranking. The three criteria used for the
relevance detailed above allow to cope with the ambiguity of the
query, since they estimate the relevance from three different per-
spectives. The relevance scores computed for each case are then
used to build three ranked lists that will be combined into a single
one. This combination is based on generating a set of normalized
scores based simply on the position of the frames. Normalized scores
rk (x) are linearly distributed from the top (1 for most relevant) to
the bottom (0 for non relevant) of the ranked list as follows:

rk (x) = M − Rk (x)
M − 1
where Rk (x) = 1, . . . , M is the ranking position associated with
image x according to each relevance criterion k ∈ {1, 2, 3} and M

,

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

is the number of informative frames in the event, being M < N
and N the total number of images in the event. The standard score
normalization [25, 30] with the min and max scores was also tested
giving similar results, so the rank-based normalization was adopted
to save computational resources.

3.3 Novelty-based Re-ranking
The relevance and diversity-aware ranked list sorts the informa-
tive images combining different criteria for relevance, but does
not explicitly cope with the redundancy in the information. Fur-
ther processing is necessary to maximize the novelty provided by
each image with respect to the rest in the summary. In information
retrieval, novelty is defined as a quality of a system that avoids
redundancy [5]. In our approach for building a summary by trun-
cating a ranked list of images, introducing novelty implies that
each image in the list should differ as much as possible from its
predecessors.

Our approach adopts the greedy selection algorithm presented
by Deselaers et. al [9] to re-rank the fused list based on novelty. The
goal of our summarization algorithm is to analyze the input set of
informative and ranked images X = {x1, ...xM } to iteratively build
another set with minimal redundancy, say YT = {xy1 , ...xyT },
where T ≤ M. Our approach starts by selecting the top ranked
image x1 in the diversity-aware ranked list as the first element of
Y, that is Y1 = {xy1 }. The novelty of each candidate image, x ∗ to
be added to the summary at iteration t = 2, ...,T is defined as:

n(x ∗, Yt ) = 1 − s(x ∗, Yt ) = 1 − max
xyj ∈Yt

(1)
s(x ∗, xyj ) is a normalized similarity measure between the candidate
x ∗ and image xyj . In this way, the more different a new image is
with respect to the ones in Yt , the higher its novelty is.

s(x ∗, xyj )

In our work, the similarity s(x ∗, xyj ) is based on visual appear-
ance. Each image is described by a feature vector corresponding
to the seventh fully-connected layer of the CaffeNet convolutional
neural network [17], which was also used as initialization for the
informativeness (see section 3.1), and whose architecture was in-
spired by AlexNet [19] and trained with the ImageNet dataset [7].
The similarity score is computed with the Euclidean distance of the
feature vectors.

The summary of the event is built by combining the relevance
and the novelty of the candidate frames, x ∗. A greedy selection
algorithm iteratively chooses the next image in the summary as:

(r (x ∗) + n(x ∗, Yt )),

xyt +1

= arg max
x ∗ ∈X\Yt

Yt +1 = Yt ∪ {xyt +1 }

(2)

that is, the image with the highest sum of relevance and novelty.
We detail the computation of r (x ∗) in Equation (4).

3.4 Estimation of Fusion Weights with Mean

Sum of Maximal Similarities

Different relevance criteria would have different importance for
the final ranking. To this aim, we propose a novel approach to
estimate the priorities of each criterion and fuse them, based on
comparing the similarity of the images from a validation set of

Figure 5: Visual representation of the Sum of Max Similari-
ties when comparing the first T = 3 images from the ranked
list with the P = 3 red, green and blue images from the valida-
tion set. The similarity between images from the validation
set and images from the ranked list is represented as a T × P
matrix of gray level squares, where each square (i, j) of the
matrix represents the similarity between the image i from
the ranked list and the image j from the validation set. High
intensity gray level values indicate high similarity.

P elements V = {xv1 , ..., xvP } with a summary of T elements
YT = {xy1 , ...xyT }.

The Sum of Maximal Similarities (SMS) of V with respect to YT

is defined as:

SMS(V, YT ) = 1
P

P
(cid:213)

i=1

s(xvi , YT )

(3)

where s(xvi , YT ) is the similarity of image xvi from the validation
set with respect to YT . Following this metric, the more similar is
the validation set V to the selected images YT , the highest the
average similarity.

The main advantage of our soft metric presented in Equation
(3) is that automatic summaries, which are very similar to the
validation images, although do not coincide, still will be assessed as
a valid solution. This feature of our soft metric is specially important
when working with sequences of egocentric photo streams, that
usually contain a high amount of redundancy.

Our summaries are built as a truncation of a ranked list, so the
value of SMS depends on T . Fig. 5 shows a schematic example,
where a validation set composed of P = 3 images (represented by
three colors: green, blue and red) is compared with an event of
M = 5 images, which have been previously filtered and ranked
based on our diversity and novelty-aware criterion. In this example,
a summary with T = 3 images is considered. Let us imagine that the
green image from V is matched with the third one in the ranked
list, while the blue and red images are matched with the second
one.

Notice that, as in our set up the validation set V is always a
subset of the input set X, hence, the final average similarity (i.e.
considering the whole sequence,T = M images) for YM will always

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

r (x) =

w(k) rk (x),

(4)

3
(cid:213)

k =1

and the final set of frames is obtained according to the updated
relevance and novelty criteria according to Equation (2).

4 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
4.1 Dataset
The dataset used for validation of our method was acquired with the
wearable camera Narrative Clip (www.getnarrative.com), which
takes a picture every 30 seconds (2 fpm). It is composed of 10 day
lifelogs from 5 different subjects, with a total of 7,110 images1.
Each day has been segmented in between 10 to 25 events manually,
although any automatic segmentation method can be used (e.g. [36]).
The event segmentation separated the pictures in a set of ordered
and relevant semantic events or segments. In this paper, we use this
segmentation as starting point for the semantic summarization.

In order to apply a quantitative evaluation of our method, each
day lifelog was annotated at two levels by psychologists in the
following way:

(1) GT Level 1 - Informativeness: positive or negative label
depending on whether the image is considered informative or non-
informative (see section 3.1). The proportion of images labeled as
informative is 61.22% of the complete dataset.

GT Level 2 - Grouping of similar images: all highly similar
informative images that belong to the same event are grouped
together (see section 3.2.4). This distinction, resembling the one
used in MediaEval 2014 Retrieving diverse social images challenge
[16], intends to provide a way of measuring how many different
clusters/groups from the ground truth are represented among the
results in the final diversity selection.

4.2 Semantic Assessment of Summaries
The assessment of visual summaries is a challenging task due to
the rich semantic content of the images and the ambiguity in the
evaluation criteria. In addition, human annotation is an expensive
resource, which becomes dramatically scarce, when dealing with
tasks that require expert annotations in the domain. In our case, the
ground truth annotations have been performed by psychologists
who defined the event’s summaries from an human-centered point
of view.

We addressed the challenge of summary assessment as follows:
starting from the daily events defined by the psychologists, the
automatic summaries were built for each of the events separately
by using the best configuration of our system. Later, the results
were presented in a blind taste test to the expert annotators.

4.2.1 Validation based on MSMS. The classical methods to eval-
uate summaries cannot be applied in our setup, because they require
the annotation of the full dataset. In a traditional case, each doc-
ument in the ground truth is labeled as relevant or non-relevant
for the summary and, in some cases, also clustered in groups of
redundant items that cover the same sub-topic. Such annotations
allow the definition of metrics like Precision [4] for relevance and

1The link to the dataset and its ground truth are prepared to be made public domain
when the article is published.

Figure 6: MSMS curves and AUC for each relevance criterion
used separately.

correspond to one. Actually, in the example of Fig. 5, SMS must
reach a value of one when all the ranked list is considered, that is,
when T = M.

Let us consider the evolution of the SMS of summary Y as the

parameter t grows (t = 1, 2, . . . , M) defined as:

SMS(V, Y) = {SMS(V, Y1), . . . , SMS(V, YM )}

We construct the SMS curves for all the validation set, interpolate
them, normalize them with respect to the length M of each sequence
and get the average of the curves, one curve for each event in the
validation set. The resulting curve represents the Mean Sum of
Maximal Similarities (MSMS).

Fig. 6 shows three examples of MSMS curves. The curve illus-
trates the evolution of the MSMS as a function of the percentage
of images covered by the visual summary. This curve is defined
over the X -axis representing the proportion of event images rep-
resented in the top t items in the list, that is, plotting the MSMS
over t/M, where M is the amount of already filtered images in the
event. In this way, the curves of events of different lengths M can
be compared on the same plot. The best MSMS curves are those
which reach higher values with the minimal amount of images in
the summary.

Note that the MSMS can be computed for the three relevance
criteria that can give as a quality of performance of each of them.
Hence, we introduce a final refinement in the fusion of the ranked
lists by estimating the confidence of each of the three relevance
criteria and using it to weight the corresponding relevance terms.
Thus, we leverage the contribution of each of the three relevance
criteria based on their stand-alone performance (see Fig. 6). This
weight corresponds to the normalized Area Under the Curve (AUC)
of the MSMS measure.

As a result, the fusion weight w(k) for the relevance criterion k

is estimated as:

w(k) =

AUC(k)
i=1 AUC(i)

.

(cid:205)3

Finally, the three normalized relevance scores associated to each
frame are aggregated with a weighted sum to obtain their fused
score r (x), as described by the following equation:

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

Cluster Recall (or subtopic-recall) [38] for diversity and/or novelty.
However, in other cases (like ours), only a small portion of the
dataset is annotated.

Given this limitation, following the framework of Subsection 3.3,
we propose an evaluation approach based on the similarity of the
images in the ground truth set G = {xд1 , ..., xдP }, when compared
to the automatic summary of T elements, YT = {xy1 , ...xyT }. In
this case, we apply the SMS, SMS(G, YT ) of ground truth G with
respect to the extracted summary, YT . As before, we obtain the
MSMS as the average value, when considering all events in the
dataset of the ground truth, which is finally plotted in the Y -axis
of our evaluation scores. Finally, the AUC is computed to obtain a
quantitative measure of each configuration for the summary.

4.2.2 Blind taste test. The resulting summaries are evaluated
with a blind taste test by the team of experts who generated the
ground truth summaries. This methodology, previously used in
[3, 22], shows different summaries from the same event to the
experts, so they can rate them from a comparative perspective. By
randomly changing the position of the different techniques at each
event, graders are unaware of what technique was used to generate
each of the summaries, guaranteeing this way that their judgments
are not biased towards any of the algorithm components.

The amount of images included in each summary corresponds
to the number of frames selected by the experts, when building the
ground truth summaries, that is, P = T . In this way, the summary
shown to the graders is a truncation of the final ranked list of
images. In our case, the experts decided the length of the automatic
summary to be a percentage of the length of the whole event. Note
that developing an automatic system to establish the length of the
summary is out of the scope of this paper.

Additionally, the selected images are sorted in the summary
according to their temporal time stamps. This final sorting helps
the user to reconstruct the story between the images to have a
better understanding of the event.

An online platform was developed for the experts to evaluate our
results. In a first round of questionnaires, we wanted to compare
the result of our diversity method using ImageNet or Places as a
similarity criterion (see Equation (1)). For each event, the question-
naire first shows all the images belonging to the event, and then
the user has to answer the questions Is the summary representative
of the event? and Which summary do you prefer? for each similarity
method (using ImageNet or Places).

On the second questionnaire the expert had to give a grade to
each of the presented ranked summaries. The three summaries
correspond respectively to: our approach, a uniform sampling of
images as a lower-bound example, and the ground truth summaries
constructed by the same experts two months earlier as an upper-
bound of the performance score. The order in which the different
summaries are shown is also randomly chosen for each event to
avoid again any bias due to the sorting.

In this case, a comparison between the three types of summaries
is obtained by asking the experts to grade each solution from 1
(worst) to 5 (best). This data collected allowed the computation of
the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) for each configuration (see section
5.3).

5 RESULTS
Two types of experiments validate the presented results: one for the
informativeness filtering and a second one using online question-
naires for the relevance, diversity and novelty on the final visual
summaries. In both cases, the evaluation was based on the feedback
provided by the experts.

5.1 Informativeness Filtering
To validate how successful is our algorithm to filter non-informative
frames, we applied a 10-fold (a day set out) cross-validation. For all
the experiments, we used the following parameters: base_lr = 10−8,
=
lr _policy = ”step”, дamma = 0.1, stepsize = 3000, blobs_lrf c6
=
= blobs_lrconv5×8 and blobs_lrf c8
blobs_lrconv5×5, blobs_lrf c7
blobs_lrconv5 × 10. In Table 1, we present the validation accuracy
obtained on each of the sets and the number of iterations applied to
achieve the best result. After having the networks trained for each
cross-validation, we evaluated the general average performance in
terms of Accuracy, Precision, Recall and F-Measure for different
informativeness score threshold values2. As we can see, we are able
to obtain the highest F-Measure value, when we filter images with
an in f ormativenessScore < 0.025. In Fig. 7, we show the Precision-
Recall curves for all thresholds, obtaining the best results with
respect to the F-Measure of: F Measure = 0.881, Accuracy = 0.846,
Precision = 0.84 and Recall = 0.926 with threshold = 0.05.

Figure 7: Precision-Recall curve for different informative-
ness score threshold values (a small subset of them are
shown in black dots) for all the sets.

5.2 Diversity
Fig. 8 illustrates qualitatively the differences obtained when in-
troducing diversity to the ranked list. As we can see, when we
introduce the novelty re-ranking step, we are able not only to ob-
tain a more visually acceptable set of images, but also to describe
with pictures everything that is happening during the whole event.
Thus, we are able to avoid focusing on a single set of high relevant
images that picture the same concept, activity or background.

2If the informativeness score of a sample is below the threshold, it will be considered
non-informative.

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

Table 1: Best validation accuracy on each set and the respective number of training iterations performed to achieve the results.
SubjX represents the anonymized sets for a given Subject.

Accuracy
Iteration #

SubjA1
0.759
3,600

SubjA2
0.841
1,000

SubjB1
0.805
3,600

SubjB2
0.795
3,400

SubjB3
0.799
3,800

SubjC1
0.837
2,600

SubjD1
0.805
2,200

SubjE1
0.867
3,600

SubjF1
0.795
2,400

SubjF2
0.897
18,000

53.19% of the times. The total adds more than 100% because some
summaries were identical for both configurations.

The second round of evaluations aimed to compare our solution
based on ImageNet features with a baseline of uniform sampling
and and upper-bound defined by the summaries in the ground truth.
Experts were asked to grade each visual summary from 1 (worse)
to 5 (best), so we could compute the Mean Opinion Score (MOS)
[35] of each solution. We adopted MOS as a metric given the highly
subjective and complex nature of the task.

Table 2: Mean Opinion Score for ImageNet, ground-truth
and uniform sampling summaries.

Our solution Ground-truth Uniform Sampling

4,57

4,94

3,99

The performance obtained by uniform sampling (3.99/5) is truly
commendable, since this score can be interpreted as a good solution.
The results obtained with our solution are also satisfactory, because
they are closer to the ground-truth than to the uniform sampling.
Experts have shown coherence with their ground-truth giving a
4.94 of Mean Opinion Score.

6 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we presented a novel approach for semantic summa-
rization of egocentric photo stream events, constructed as a ranked
list of general semantic criteria. Our method is based on two main
criteria: relevance to optimize semantic diversity in the summary,
and novelty to avoid redundancy in the final result. After applying a
pre-processing step to filter non-informative images through a new
CNN-based method, relevance diversity-aware ranking is obtained
by integrating state of the art techniques for saliency detection, ob-
ject recognition and face detection. This list is re-ranked to reduce
redundancy so that each image of the truncated list differs as much
as possible from its predecessors. We proposed a new soft metric to
rank the informative frames and construct the final summary that
does not penalize summaries equivalent (very similar, but not coin-
ciding exactly) to the ground truth. Experimental results indicate
high acceptance and satisfaction of psychologists achieving mean
opinion score of 4.57 out of 5.0.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by contracts SGR1219 and SGR1421 by
the Catalan AGAUR office, and TIN2012-38187-C03-01 and TEC2013-
43935-R by the Spanish Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad
and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF). We ac-
knowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation for the donation of
GPUs.

Figure 8: Three examples of the top 5 images obtained before
introducing diversity (uneven rows) and after introducing it
(even rows).

5.3 Ranking Summary Quality
The first round of blind taste tests posed two questions for each
event. Firstly, experts decided whether each presented summary
was representative, and secondly, they chose the preferred one
Given the question Is the summary representative of the event?, in
95.74% the experts agreed with our solution, using the ImageNet
features to compute the similarity in the novelty-based re-ranking.
Using the other alternative, features from Places CNN, the obtained
result was 94.33%. We conclude that our approach generates repre-
sentative summavery high portion of events.

The second question asked was: Which summary do you prefer?
and experts had to choose their preferred summary, allowing just
one answer. The solution based on Imagenet features was chosen
in 59.57% of teh cases, while the one based on Places was selected

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

REFERENCES
[1] Omid Aghazadeh, Josephine Sullivan, and Stefan Carlsson. 2011. Novelty detec-
tion from an ego-centric perspective. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2011 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 3297–3304.

[2] Michael Blighe, Aiden Doherty, Alan F. Smeaton, and Noel E. O’Connor. 2008.
Keyframe Detection in Visual Lifelogs. In Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments (PETRA
’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 55, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1389586.1389652

[3] Marc Bolaños, Ricard Mestre, Estefanía Talavera, Xavier Giró-i Nieto, and Petia
Radeva. 2015. Visual Summary of Egocentric Photostreams by Representative
Keyframes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.01130 (2015).

[4] Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The Use of MMR, Diversity-based
Reranking for Reordering Documents and Producing Summaries. In Proceedings of
the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’98). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 335–336. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/290941.291025

[5] Charles LA Clarke, Maheedhar Kolla, Gordon V Cormack, Olga Vechtomova,
Azin Ashkan, Stefan Büttcher, and Ian MacKinnon. 2008. Novelty and diversity
in information retrieval evaluation. In Proceedings of the 31st annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM,
659–666.

[6] Duc-Tien Dang-Nguyen, Luca Piras, Giorgio Giacinto, Giulia Boato, and FGB
De Natale. 2014. Retrieval of Diverse Images by Pre-filtering and Hierarchical
Clustering. Working Notes of MediaEval (2014).

[7] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. Ima-
genet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009. IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 248–255.

[8] Thomas Deselaers, Tobias Gass, Philippe Dreuw, and Hermann Ney. 2009. Jointly
Optimising Relevance and Diversity in Image Retrieval. In Proceedings of the
ACM International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval (CIVR ’09). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, Article 39, 8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1646396.1646443
[9] Thomas Deselaers, Tobias Gass, Philippe Dreuw, and Hermann Ney. 2009. Jointly
optimising relevance and diversity in image retrieval. In Proceedings of the ACM
international conference on image and video retrieval. ACM, 39.

[10] Aiden R. Doherty, Daragh Byrne, Alan F. Smeaton, Gareth J.F. Jones, and Mark
Hughes. 2008. Investigating Keyframe Selection Methods in the Novel Domain
of Passively Captured Visual Lifelogs. In Proceedings of the 2008 International
Conference on Content-based Image and Video Retrieval (CIVR ’08). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 259–268. https://doi.org/10.1145/1386352.1386389

[11] Joydeep Ghosh, Yong Jae Lee, and Kristen Grauman. 2012. Discovering important
people and objects for egocentric video summarization. In 2012 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE, 1346–1353.

[12] Boqing Gong, Wei-Lun Chao, Kristen Grauman, and Fei Sha. 2014. Di-
verse Sequential Subset Selection for Supervised Video Summarization.
In Advances
Information Processing Systems 27, Z. Ghahra-
mani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N.D. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger
(Eds.). Curran Associates,
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
5413-diverse-sequential-subset-selection-for-supervised-video-summarization.
pdf

Inc., 2069–2077.

in Neural

[13] Michael Gygli, Helmut Grabner, Hayko Riemenschneider, and Luc Van Gool.
2014. Creating summaries from user videos. In European conference on computer
vision. Springer, 505–520.

[14] Steve Hodges, Lyndsay Williams, Emma Berry, Shahram Izadi, James Srinivasan,
Alex Butler, Gavin Smyth, Narinder Kapur, and Ken Wood. 2006. SenseCam: A
Retrospective Memory Aid. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp’06). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 177–
193. https://doi.org/10.1007/11853565_11

[15] Judy Hoffman, Sergio Guadarrama, Eric Tzeng, Jeff Donahue, Ross B. Girshick,
Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. 2014. LSDA: Large Scale Detection Through
Adaptation. CoRR abs/1407.5035 (2014). http://arxiv.org/abs/1407.5035

[16] Bogdan Ionescu, Adrian Popescu, Mihai Lupu, Alexandru L Gınsca, and Henning
Müller. 2014. Retrieving diverse social images at mediaeval 2014: Challenge,
dataset and evaluation. In MediaEval 2014 Workshop, Barcelona, Spain.

[17] Yangqing Jia, Evan Shelhamer, Jeff Donahue, Sergey Karayev, Jonathan Long,
Ross Girshick, Sergio Guadarrama, and Trevor Darrell. 2014. Caffe: Convolutional
architecture for fast feature embedding. In Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Multimedia. ACM, 675–678.

[18] Amornched Jinda-Apiraksa, Jana Machajdik, and Robert Sablatnig. 2012. A
keyframe selection of lifelog image sequences. Erasmus Mundus M. Sc. in Visions
and Robotics thesis, Vienna University of Technology (TU Wien) (2012).

[19] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. 2012. Imagenet classifica-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems. 1097–1105.

[20] Alex Kulesza and Ben Taskar. 2012. Determinantal point processes for machine

learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.6083 (2012).

[21] Matthew L. Lee and Anind K. Dey. 2008. Lifelogging Memory Appliance for
People with Episodic Memory Impairment. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
44–53. https://doi.org/10.1145/1409635.1409643

[22] Zheng Lu and Kristen Grauman. 2013. Story-driven summarization for egocentric
video. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2013 IEEE Conference
on. IEEE, 2714–2721.

[23] S. Mann. 1998. ’WearCam’ (The wearable camera): personal imaging systems for
long-term use in wearable tetherless computer-mediated reality and personal
photo/videographic memory prosthesis. In Wearable Computers, 1998. Digest of
Papers. Second International Symposium on. 124–131. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ISWC.1998.729538

[24] W. W. Mayol, B. J. Tordoff, and D. W. Murray. 2002. Wearable Visual Robots.
Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 6, 1 (Jan. 2002), 37–48. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s007790200004

[25] Mark Montague and Javed A Aslam. 2001. Relevance score normalization for
metasearch. In Proceedings of the tenth international conference on Information
and knowledge management. ACM, 427–433.

[26] Junting Pan, Kevin McGuinness, and Xavier Giró-i Nieto. 2016. End-to-end

Convolutional Network for Saliency Prediction. In Submitted to CVPR.

[27] P. Piasek, K. Irving, and A.F. Smeaton. 2011. SenseCam intervention based on
Cognitive Stimulation Therapy framework for early-stage dementia. In Pervasive
Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2011 5th International
Conference on. 522–525.

[28] Paulina Piasek, Alan F Smeaton, et al. 2014. Using lifelogging to help construct

the identity of people with dementia. (2014).

[29] Sachan Priyamvada Rajendra and N Keshaveni. 2014. A survey of automatic
video summarization techniques. International Journal of Electronics, Electrical
and Computational System 2 (2014).

[30] M Elena Renda and Umberto Straccia. 2003. Web metasearch: rank vs. score
based rank aggregation methods. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM symposium on
Applied computing. ACM, 841–846.

[31] Abigail J. Sellen, Andrew Fogg, Mike Aitken, Steve Hodges, Carsten Rother, and
Ken Wood. 2007. Do Life-logging Technologies Support Memory for the Past?:
An Experimental Study Using Sensecam. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’07). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
81–90. https://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240636

[32] Kai Song, Yonghong Tian, Wen Gao, and Tiejun Huang. 2006. Diversifying the
Image Retrieval Results. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual ACM International
Conference on Multimedia (MULTIMEDIA ’06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 707–710.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1180639.1180789

[33] Aimee Spector, Lene Thorgrimsen, Bob Woods, Lindsay Royan, Steve Davies,
Margaret Butterworth (deceased), and Martin Orrell. 2003. Efficacy of an evidence-
based cognitive stimulation therapy programme for people with dementia. The
British Journal of Psychiatry 183, 3 (2003), 248–254. https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.
183.3.248

[34] Eleftherios Spyromitros-Xioufis, Symeon Papadopoulos, Yiannis Kompatsiaris,
and Ioannis Vlahavas. 2014. SocialSensor: Finding Diverse Images at MediaEval
2014. (2014).

[35] Robert C Streijl, Stefan Winkler, and David S Hands. 2016. Mean opinion score
(MOS) revisited: methods and applications, limitations and alternatives. Multi-
media Systems 22, 2 (2016), 213–227.

[36] Estefania Talavera, Mariella Dimiccoli, Marc Bolaños, Maedeh Aghaei, and Petia
Radeva. 2015. R-clustering for egocentric video segmentation. In Pattern Recog-
nition and Image Analysis. Springer, 327–336.

[37] Reinier H. van Leuken, Lluis Garcia, Ximena Olivares, and Roelof van Zwol.
2009. Visual Diversification of Image Search Results. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW ’09). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 341–350. https://doi.org/10.1145/1526709.1526756

[38] Cheng Xiang Zhai, William W Cohen, and John Lafferty. 2003. Beyond inde-
pendent relevance: methods and evaluation metrics for subtopic retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 26th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research
and development in informaion retrieval. ACM, 10–17.

[39] Xiangxin Zhu and Deva Ramanan. 2012. Face detection, pose estimation, and
landmark localization in the wild. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2012 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 2879–2886.

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

Aniol Lidon
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Catalonia/Spain

Marc Bolaños
Universitat de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
marc.bolanos@ub.edu

Mariella Dimiccoli
Universitat de Barcelona
Computer Vision Center
Barcelona, Spain
mariella.dimiccolig@cvc.uab.es

Petia Radeva
Universitat de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
petia.radeva@ub.edu

Maite Garolera
Consorci Sanitari de Terrassa
Terrassa, Spain
maite.garolera@cst.cat

Xavier Giro-i-Nieto
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Catalonia/Spain
xavier.giro@upc.edu

7
1
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
1
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
8
3
4
0
0
.
1
1
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
With the rapid increase of users of wearable cameras in recent
years and of the amount of data they produce, there is a strong
need for automatic retrieval and summarization techniques. This
work addresses the problem of automatically summarizing egocen-
tric photo streams captured through a wearable camera by taking
an image retrieval perspective. After removing non-informative
images by a new CNN-based filter, images are ranked by rele-
vance to ensure semantic diversity and finally re-ranked by a nov-
elty criterion to reduce redundancy. To assess the results, a new
evaluation metric is proposed which takes into account the non-
uniqueness of the solution. Experimental results applied on a data-
base of 7,110 images from 6 different subjects and evaluated by
experts gave 95.74% of experts satisfaction and a Mean Opinion
Score of 4.57 out of 5.0. Source code to reproduce this work is
available at https://github.com/imatge-upc/egocentric-2017-lta.

ACM Reference format:
Aniol Lidon, Marc Bolaños, Mariella Dimiccoli, Petia Radeva, Maite Garolera,
and Xavier Giro-i-Nieto. 2017. Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo
Stream Events. In Proceedings of LTA’17, Mountain View, CA, USA, October
23, 2017, 9 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3133202.3133204

1 INTRODUCTION
From smartphones to wearable devices, digital cameras are becom-
ing ubiquitous. This process is being accompanied by the progres-
sive reduction of digital storage cost, making it possible to collect
large amounts of high-quality pictures in a easy and affordable way.
This situation arises a number of natural questions: how to manage
this large amount of pictures? Do we really need to store all of
them? Summarization, the process of generating a proper, compact
and meaningful representation of a given image collection through
a subset of representative images, is crucial to help managing and

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA
© 2017 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5503-2/17/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3133202.3133204

Figure 1: Example of temporal neighbouring images ac-
quired by a wearable photo camera.

browsing efficiently large volumes of video content. Although sum-
marization is not a new research topic in Computer Vision [13, 29],
it is still a largely open problem.

Our goal in this paper is to address the summarization prob-
lem focusing on a particular scenario: the one of analyzing photo
streams acquired through a wearable camera. Motivation for this
work is given by the explosion of the number of wearable camera
users in recent years and, consequently, by the huge amount of
data they produce. To record daily experiences from an egocentric,
first-person perspective is a trend that has been growing progres-
sively since 1998, when Steve Mann proposed the WearCam [23]. In
2000, Mayol et al. proposed a necklace-like lifelogging device [24]
and, in 2006, Microsoft Research started to commercialize the first
egocentric lifelogging portable camera, the SenseCam, for research
purposes [14].

Several authors [21, 27, 28, 31] have studied the benefits of lifel-
ogging cues such as egocentric images to help people with dementia
to enhance their memory or to help them remember about their
forgotten past. Sellen et al. [31] showed that episodic details from
a visual ’lifelog’ can be presented to users as memory cues to assist
them in remembering the details of their original experience. To
support people with dementia, Piasek et al. [27] introduced the
"SenseCam Therapy" as a therapeutic approach similar to the well
established "Cognitive Stimulation Theraphy" [33]. Participants
were asked to wear SenseCam in order to collect images of events
from their everyday lives, then images were reviewed with a trained
therapist.

However, lifelogging technologies produce huge amounts of
data (thousands of images per day) that should be reviewed by
both patients and caregivers. To be efficient, lifelogging systems
need to summarize the most relevant information in the images. On
the other hand, in order to make possible the recording of images
from the whole day, it is necessary to use wearable cameras with
low temporal resolution (2 fpm). The peculiarity of these image
collections is that, due to the low-temporal resolution of the camera

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

and to the free motion of its wearer, temporally adjacent images may
be very different in appearance even if they belong to the same event
and should therefore be grouped together. For instance, during a
meeting, the people the camera wearer is interacting with and the
objects around them may change their position and frequently
appear occluded (see Fig. 1).

As a consequence of this, taking the semantics into account is
crucial to summarize egocentric sequences acquired by a low tempo-
ral resolution camera. This paper proposes a method to summarize
each of the events present in a daily egocentric sequence, aiming
at preserving semantic information and diversity, while reducing
the total number of images. The method consists of three major
steps: first, non-informative images are removed; second, they are
ranked by semantic relevance; and finally, a new re-rank is applied
by enforcing diversity among the chosen subset of pictures. Our
contributions can be summarized as follows:

(1) Propose a CNN-based informativeness estimator for egocen-

tric images.

images.

(2) Define a set of semantic relevance criteria for egocentric

(3) Formulate the summarization task as a retrieval problem by
combining informativeness, relevance and novelty criteria.
(4) Define a soft metric to assess the novelty from partially

annotated image datasets.

(5) Our results have been validated by medical experts with
the aim of being used in a cognitive training framework
to reinforce the memory of patients with mild cognitive
impairment.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the next section
reviews the related work, section 3 details the proposed method,
section 4 describes our experimental setup, section 5 presents the
experimental results and finally, section 6 ends the paper with some
concluding remarks. Source code to reproduce this work is available
at https://github.com/imatge-upc/egocentric-2017-lta.

2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Summarization by key-frame selection in

Lifelogging

Egocentric photo stream summarization has been traditionally for-
mulated as the problem of grouping lifelog images into coherent
collections (or events) by: first, extracting low-level spatio-temporal
features and then, selecting the most representative image from
each event. In this spirit, many authors proposed different strate-
gies for temporal segmentation and key-frame selection. Doherty
et al. [10] proposed a key-frame selection technique, which seeks to
select the image with the highest ’quality’ as key-frame by relying
on five types of features: contrast, color variance, global sharpness,
noise, saliency and external sensors data (accelerometers and light).
In addition to image quality, Blighe et al. [2] considered image sim-
ilarity to select a key-frame in an event. Basically, after applying
an image quality filter that removes all poor quality images, they
selected the image which has the highest average similarity to all
other images in the event as the key-frame. In that case, similarity
was measured relying on the distance of SIFT descriptors. In [18],
the key-frame is selected by a nearest neighbour ratio strategy that

favors high quality images and, if the difference in quality is not
large enough, favors images closer to the middle of the temporal
segment. More recently, the auhors in [3] proposed to use a Random
Walk for selecting a single and most representative image for each
temporal segment.

While these methods rely solely on low-level or mid-level fea-
tures for the temporal segmentation and key-frame detection, a
few recent works have introduced a higher semantic level in the
selection process for video cameras. Although, in this cases, due to
the higher temporal resolution of the camera (about 30fps), aiming
at selecting subshots (short video sub-sequences) instead of unique
key-frames. Lu and Grauman [22] and lately Ghosh et al. [11] sug-
gested that video summarization should preserve the narrative
character of a visual lifelog and, therefore, it should ideally be made
of a coherent chain of video subshots in which each subshot influ-
ences the next through some subset of key visual objects. Following
this idea, in [11, 22], first important people and objects are discov-
ered based on their interaction time with the camera wearer and
then, a subshot selection driven by key-object event occurrences is
applied. Subshot selection is performed by incorporating into an
objective function a term corresponding to the influence between
subshots as well as image diversity. To model diversity, the authors
relied on GIST descriptors and color histograms to model scenes
and proposed a measure of diversity that is high when the scenes
in sequential subshots are dissimilar to ensure visual uniqueness.
Visual diversity in lifelog summaries is modeled in [1] through
the concept of novelty, which the authors heuristically defined as
the deviation from some standard background. According to this
definition, novelty is detected based on the absence of a good reg-
istration, in terms of ego-motion and the environment, between a
new sequence and stored reference sequences. More recently, Gong
et al. [12] proposed the so called Sequential Determinantal Point
Process (seqDPP) approach for video summarization, a probabilistic
model with the ability to teach the system how to select informa-
tive and diverse subsets from human-created summaries, so as to
best fit human-perception quality based on evaluation metrics. This
work is an adaptation to sequences of [20], which is able to capture
the strong dependency structures between items in sequences. It
is worth to mention that all these works have been conceived to
deal with video data, where, assuming that the temporal segmenta-
tion is good, temporal coherence and frame redundancy make the
key-frame selection process easier.

2.2 Diversity and novelty in information

retrieval

One of the first works that tried to approach the problem of obtain-
ing a diverse set of elements was presented in 1998 by Carbonell &
Goldstain [4]. Their proposal, which was applied to the context of
text retrieval and summarization, aimed at obtaining results highly
relevant for the query, but presenting a low redundancy. They de-
fine the marginal relevance as the linear combination of relevance
and novelty, measured independently. They aimed at maximizing it
iteratively, defining this way what they call the Maximal Marginal
Relevance (MMR).

A similar formulation to MMR of the diversification problem was
given more recently by Deselaers et al. [8] in the problem of image

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

Figure 2: General scheme of our event summarization methodology.

retrieval. Likewise, they jointly optimized the relevance and the
diversity of the query, although reformulating the general solution
by incorporating dynamic programming techniques to the initial
proposal.

Diversity in social image retrieval was one of the focus of the Me-
diaEval 2013, 2014 and 2015 benchmarks and attracted the interest
of many groups working in this area. Most participants developed
diversification approaches that combined clustering with a key-
frame selection strategy to extract representative images for each
cluster. Spyromitros et al. proposed an MMR-based approach [34]
that jointly considers relevance and diversity, but using a super-
vised classification model to obtain the relevance scores learned
from the user feedback. The contribution from Dang-Nguyen et al.
[6] was to filter out non-relevant images at the beginning of the
process before applying diversity, hence simplifying it.

In [32], the authors presented a method for detecting and resolv-
ing the ambiguity of a query based on the textual features of the
image collection. If a query has an ambiguous nature, this ambigu-
ity should be reflected in the diversity of the result to increase user
satisfaction. Leuken et al. [37] proposed to reduce the ambiguity
of results provided by image search engines relying on textual de-
scriptions by seeking for the visual diversification of image search
results. This is achieved by clustering the retrieved images based
on their visual similarity and by selecting a representative image
for each cluster. In these works ’diversity’ is aimed at addressing
the ’ambiguity’ of the textual descriptions (tags) in queries rather
than avoiding redundancy in search results. The same terminol-
ogy is used by [5], where the term ’novelty’ is meant to address
redundancy in the retrieved documents. In this work we will use
the terms novelty and diversity as defined in [5].

3 METHODOLOGY
Inspired by the image retrieval work, we question which would be
the most suitable diversity and relevance criteria applied on ego-
centric images that kept the narrative character of the visual lifelog.
Taking into account that the images are acquired non-intentionally,
it is important to disregard the non-informative images (see Section
3.1) and keep the minimal set that represents the visual event. In
this section, we explain the four main steps applied to construct
the final resulting summary (see Fig. 2):

(1) Informativeness Filtering (Section 3.1): egocentric images
are acquired non-intentionally and therefore, many of them may be
non-informative, capturing neither (or partially) objects nor people,
or being blurred or dark. By means of a CNN-based informativeness
filtering method, we discard most of the non-informative images
from the egocentric event.

(2) Relevance and Diversity-aware Ranking (Section 3.2): an
initial relevance image ranking is computed taking into account
different criteria such as Saliency and Objectness for dealing with
the ambiguity or under-specification of queries like What is the user
doing?, or Where is the user?, and Face Detection for answering the
question With whom is the user most likely interacting?.

(3) Novelty-based Re-ranking (Section 3.3): a final re-ranking
based on a novelty-maximization procedure is applied on the images
already ranked by relevance. This step is crucial to select those
images that represent the most varied set of concepts appearing
avoiding redundancy without semantic loss.

(4) Estimation of Fusion Weights with Mean Sum of Max-
imal Similarities (Section 3.4): in this step, we define a novel soft
metric, which we call Mean Sum of Maximal Similarities (MSMS),
in order to define the priorities of the different relevance terms and
construct the final summary.

3.1 Informativeness Filtering
Considering both the free motion of egocentric cameras and the
non-intentionality of the pictures they take, several problems are in-
herent to them as over- or under-light exposure, blurriness, pictures
of the sky or ground, pictures where possible objects of interest
are badly centered in the image or even non-existent, etc. Such
images are considered as non-informative pictures. A way to avoid
a good amount of the undesired images in the final summary and
also to boost the performance of the next steps in our methodology,
would be being able to discriminate the informative pictures. Fig.
3 illustrates informative vs. non-informative photos taken by the
wearable camera.

In order to learn a model of informative pictures, and taking
into account the complexity of distinguishing visually whether an
image is informative enough or not, we propose training a CNN
for a binary problem. Thus, all the images with an undesired ar-
tifact (empty image, blurred image, image with small amount of
information, image where something occludes most of the image

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

Figure 3: Examples of informative images (top) and non-
informative images (bottom) belonging to the same events.
Faces appearing in the images have been manually blurred
for privacy concerns.

Figure 4: Images acquired by a lifelogging device, where ob-
jects of interest appear like: computer, mobile, coffee, hand,
bicycle, person, face, flower, apple, etc.

region, sky, ground, ceiling, room wall, etc.) will be considered
non-informative (label 0), and the rest (images with semantic con-
tent) will be considered informative (label 1). With this procedure,
we will be able to extract an informativeness score for each image
and filter the unuseful ones. In order to remove as many images
as possible, but with the ultimate goal of having a very high re-
call (always try to keep any informative image for the next steps),
we only discard the images with in f ormativenessScore < 0.025,
which correspond to the ones that are considered non-informative
for certain by the CNN (see experimental results in section 5.1).

The network training for the binary class distinction is performed
by fine-tuning the CaffeNet [19] pre-trained on the ImageNet [7]
dataset, provided in the software Caffe [17].

3.2 Relevance and Diversity-aware Ranking
Once non-informative images are discarded, we proceed to rank
the remaining images by considering a relevance criteria. Our so-
lution formulates the summarization problem in similar terms as
in information retrieval. A ranked list of event frames is generated
in such a way that a summary of T images directly corresponds to
a truncation of the ranked list of N elements at its T -th position.
Classic retrieval problems build their ranked lists as a response
to a user query, in the summarization of events, this query would
correspond to: Select T images to describe the event depicted into
these N frames. This query is highly ambiguous as an event can be
described from different perspectives. For example, an egocentric vi-
sual summary of an event may respond to multiple intentions, such
as: Where is the user? What activity is the user performing? With
whom is the user interacting? We hypothesize that the relevance of
each image with respect to these questions can be estimated with
computer vision tools for saliency prediction, detection of objects
and detection of faces.

3.2.1

Saliency Prediction for image relevance. We assume that
images with more salient content are relevant and should have a
higher probability to be included in the summary. Visual saliency

can be triggered by a broad range of reasons, such as objects, people
or characteristic features appearing in the picture. Many computer
vision algorithms try to estimate the fixation points of the human
eyes in a scene by means of saliency maps. These are heat maps of
the same size of the image, whose higher values correspond to the
image locations with a higher probability of capturing the human
visual attention.

In this work, we compute the saliency maps with SalNet [26], an
end-to-end convolutional network for saliency prediction. We adopt
the overall sum of the values in the saliency map as a quantitative
estimator of the image relevance.

3.2.2 Object Detection for image relevance. We assume that
those images containing objects are relevant since these objects
likely correspond to the ones the user is interacting with. These
objects would address the question of What is the user doing? (see
Fig. 4). In addition, introducing a semantic interpretation of the
scene, targets the summary from a higher abstraction level than
saliency maps.

In our work, we used the off-the-shelf tool Large Scale Detection
through Adaptation (LSDA) presented in [15]. This object detector is
based on a CNN fine-tuned for local scale and provides a semantic
label and a confidence score in the localization of the objects in the
scene.

This tool allows to estimate the relevance of each frame by sum-
ming the detection scores of all objects in the picture, so that the
frames with higher confidence detection will be considered as more
relevant.

3.2.3

Face Detection for image relevance. We assume that im-
ages containing people are also relevant, since these people likely
correspond to the ones the user is interacting with, and they would
be useful to answer the question With whom is the user interacting?.
Therefore, a face detector complements the object detector into
providing a cue for the user social interactions during the event.

In our solution, we adopted the off-the-shelf face detector by
Zhu et al. [39], which provides a confidence for each of the detected
faces. The relevance of each frame in terms of social interaction was
estimated by summing the confidence scores of the face detectors.
In the particular implementation of [39], detection scores may also
be described with negative values, so we actually used these scores
in an exponential sum, which conveniently deals with the negative
scores as well as encourages the selection of frames with multiple
detected faces.

3.2.4 Diversity-aware Ranking. The three criteria used for the
relevance detailed above allow to cope with the ambiguity of the
query, since they estimate the relevance from three different per-
spectives. The relevance scores computed for each case are then
used to build three ranked lists that will be combined into a single
one. This combination is based on generating a set of normalized
scores based simply on the position of the frames. Normalized scores
rk (x) are linearly distributed from the top (1 for most relevant) to
the bottom (0 for non relevant) of the ranked list as follows:

rk (x) = M − Rk (x)
M − 1
where Rk (x) = 1, . . . , M is the ranking position associated with
image x according to each relevance criterion k ∈ {1, 2, 3} and M

,

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

is the number of informative frames in the event, being M < N
and N the total number of images in the event. The standard score
normalization [25, 30] with the min and max scores was also tested
giving similar results, so the rank-based normalization was adopted
to save computational resources.

3.3 Novelty-based Re-ranking
The relevance and diversity-aware ranked list sorts the informa-
tive images combining different criteria for relevance, but does
not explicitly cope with the redundancy in the information. Fur-
ther processing is necessary to maximize the novelty provided by
each image with respect to the rest in the summary. In information
retrieval, novelty is defined as a quality of a system that avoids
redundancy [5]. In our approach for building a summary by trun-
cating a ranked list of images, introducing novelty implies that
each image in the list should differ as much as possible from its
predecessors.

Our approach adopts the greedy selection algorithm presented
by Deselaers et. al [9] to re-rank the fused list based on novelty. The
goal of our summarization algorithm is to analyze the input set of
informative and ranked images X = {x1, ...xM } to iteratively build
another set with minimal redundancy, say YT = {xy1 , ...xyT },
where T ≤ M. Our approach starts by selecting the top ranked
image x1 in the diversity-aware ranked list as the first element of
Y, that is Y1 = {xy1 }. The novelty of each candidate image, x ∗ to
be added to the summary at iteration t = 2, ...,T is defined as:

n(x ∗, Yt ) = 1 − s(x ∗, Yt ) = 1 − max
xyj ∈Yt

(1)
s(x ∗, xyj ) is a normalized similarity measure between the candidate
x ∗ and image xyj . In this way, the more different a new image is
with respect to the ones in Yt , the higher its novelty is.

s(x ∗, xyj )

In our work, the similarity s(x ∗, xyj ) is based on visual appear-
ance. Each image is described by a feature vector corresponding
to the seventh fully-connected layer of the CaffeNet convolutional
neural network [17], which was also used as initialization for the
informativeness (see section 3.1), and whose architecture was in-
spired by AlexNet [19] and trained with the ImageNet dataset [7].
The similarity score is computed with the Euclidean distance of the
feature vectors.

The summary of the event is built by combining the relevance
and the novelty of the candidate frames, x ∗. A greedy selection
algorithm iteratively chooses the next image in the summary as:

(r (x ∗) + n(x ∗, Yt )),

xyt +1

= arg max
x ∗ ∈X\Yt

Yt +1 = Yt ∪ {xyt +1 }

(2)

that is, the image with the highest sum of relevance and novelty.
We detail the computation of r (x ∗) in Equation (4).

3.4 Estimation of Fusion Weights with Mean

Sum of Maximal Similarities

Different relevance criteria would have different importance for
the final ranking. To this aim, we propose a novel approach to
estimate the priorities of each criterion and fuse them, based on
comparing the similarity of the images from a validation set of

Figure 5: Visual representation of the Sum of Max Similari-
ties when comparing the first T = 3 images from the ranked
list with the P = 3 red, green and blue images from the valida-
tion set. The similarity between images from the validation
set and images from the ranked list is represented as a T × P
matrix of gray level squares, where each square (i, j) of the
matrix represents the similarity between the image i from
the ranked list and the image j from the validation set. High
intensity gray level values indicate high similarity.

P elements V = {xv1 , ..., xvP } with a summary of T elements
YT = {xy1 , ...xyT }.

The Sum of Maximal Similarities (SMS) of V with respect to YT

is defined as:

SMS(V, YT ) = 1
P

P
(cid:213)

i=1

s(xvi , YT )

(3)

where s(xvi , YT ) is the similarity of image xvi from the validation
set with respect to YT . Following this metric, the more similar is
the validation set V to the selected images YT , the highest the
average similarity.

The main advantage of our soft metric presented in Equation
(3) is that automatic summaries, which are very similar to the
validation images, although do not coincide, still will be assessed as
a valid solution. This feature of our soft metric is specially important
when working with sequences of egocentric photo streams, that
usually contain a high amount of redundancy.

Our summaries are built as a truncation of a ranked list, so the
value of SMS depends on T . Fig. 5 shows a schematic example,
where a validation set composed of P = 3 images (represented by
three colors: green, blue and red) is compared with an event of
M = 5 images, which have been previously filtered and ranked
based on our diversity and novelty-aware criterion. In this example,
a summary with T = 3 images is considered. Let us imagine that the
green image from V is matched with the third one in the ranked
list, while the blue and red images are matched with the second
one.

Notice that, as in our set up the validation set V is always a
subset of the input set X, hence, the final average similarity (i.e.
considering the whole sequence,T = M images) for YM will always

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

r (x) =

w(k) rk (x),

(4)

3
(cid:213)

k =1

and the final set of frames is obtained according to the updated
relevance and novelty criteria according to Equation (2).

4 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
4.1 Dataset
The dataset used for validation of our method was acquired with the
wearable camera Narrative Clip (www.getnarrative.com), which
takes a picture every 30 seconds (2 fpm). It is composed of 10 day
lifelogs from 5 different subjects, with a total of 7,110 images1.
Each day has been segmented in between 10 to 25 events manually,
although any automatic segmentation method can be used (e.g. [36]).
The event segmentation separated the pictures in a set of ordered
and relevant semantic events or segments. In this paper, we use this
segmentation as starting point for the semantic summarization.

In order to apply a quantitative evaluation of our method, each
day lifelog was annotated at two levels by psychologists in the
following way:

(1) GT Level 1 - Informativeness: positive or negative label
depending on whether the image is considered informative or non-
informative (see section 3.1). The proportion of images labeled as
informative is 61.22% of the complete dataset.

GT Level 2 - Grouping of similar images: all highly similar
informative images that belong to the same event are grouped
together (see section 3.2.4). This distinction, resembling the one
used in MediaEval 2014 Retrieving diverse social images challenge
[16], intends to provide a way of measuring how many different
clusters/groups from the ground truth are represented among the
results in the final diversity selection.

4.2 Semantic Assessment of Summaries
The assessment of visual summaries is a challenging task due to
the rich semantic content of the images and the ambiguity in the
evaluation criteria. In addition, human annotation is an expensive
resource, which becomes dramatically scarce, when dealing with
tasks that require expert annotations in the domain. In our case, the
ground truth annotations have been performed by psychologists
who defined the event’s summaries from an human-centered point
of view.

We addressed the challenge of summary assessment as follows:
starting from the daily events defined by the psychologists, the
automatic summaries were built for each of the events separately
by using the best configuration of our system. Later, the results
were presented in a blind taste test to the expert annotators.

4.2.1 Validation based on MSMS. The classical methods to eval-
uate summaries cannot be applied in our setup, because they require
the annotation of the full dataset. In a traditional case, each doc-
ument in the ground truth is labeled as relevant or non-relevant
for the summary and, in some cases, also clustered in groups of
redundant items that cover the same sub-topic. Such annotations
allow the definition of metrics like Precision [4] for relevance and

1The link to the dataset and its ground truth are prepared to be made public domain
when the article is published.

Figure 6: MSMS curves and AUC for each relevance criterion
used separately.

correspond to one. Actually, in the example of Fig. 5, SMS must
reach a value of one when all the ranked list is considered, that is,
when T = M.

Let us consider the evolution of the SMS of summary Y as the

parameter t grows (t = 1, 2, . . . , M) defined as:

SMS(V, Y) = {SMS(V, Y1), . . . , SMS(V, YM )}

We construct the SMS curves for all the validation set, interpolate
them, normalize them with respect to the length M of each sequence
and get the average of the curves, one curve for each event in the
validation set. The resulting curve represents the Mean Sum of
Maximal Similarities (MSMS).

Fig. 6 shows three examples of MSMS curves. The curve illus-
trates the evolution of the MSMS as a function of the percentage
of images covered by the visual summary. This curve is defined
over the X -axis representing the proportion of event images rep-
resented in the top t items in the list, that is, plotting the MSMS
over t/M, where M is the amount of already filtered images in the
event. In this way, the curves of events of different lengths M can
be compared on the same plot. The best MSMS curves are those
which reach higher values with the minimal amount of images in
the summary.

Note that the MSMS can be computed for the three relevance
criteria that can give as a quality of performance of each of them.
Hence, we introduce a final refinement in the fusion of the ranked
lists by estimating the confidence of each of the three relevance
criteria and using it to weight the corresponding relevance terms.
Thus, we leverage the contribution of each of the three relevance
criteria based on their stand-alone performance (see Fig. 6). This
weight corresponds to the normalized Area Under the Curve (AUC)
of the MSMS measure.

As a result, the fusion weight w(k) for the relevance criterion k

is estimated as:

w(k) =

AUC(k)
i=1 AUC(i)

.

(cid:205)3

Finally, the three normalized relevance scores associated to each
frame are aggregated with a weighted sum to obtain their fused
score r (x), as described by the following equation:

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

Cluster Recall (or subtopic-recall) [38] for diversity and/or novelty.
However, in other cases (like ours), only a small portion of the
dataset is annotated.

Given this limitation, following the framework of Subsection 3.3,
we propose an evaluation approach based on the similarity of the
images in the ground truth set G = {xд1 , ..., xдP }, when compared
to the automatic summary of T elements, YT = {xy1 , ...xyT }. In
this case, we apply the SMS, SMS(G, YT ) of ground truth G with
respect to the extracted summary, YT . As before, we obtain the
MSMS as the average value, when considering all events in the
dataset of the ground truth, which is finally plotted in the Y -axis
of our evaluation scores. Finally, the AUC is computed to obtain a
quantitative measure of each configuration for the summary.

4.2.2 Blind taste test. The resulting summaries are evaluated
with a blind taste test by the team of experts who generated the
ground truth summaries. This methodology, previously used in
[3, 22], shows different summaries from the same event to the
experts, so they can rate them from a comparative perspective. By
randomly changing the position of the different techniques at each
event, graders are unaware of what technique was used to generate
each of the summaries, guaranteeing this way that their judgments
are not biased towards any of the algorithm components.

The amount of images included in each summary corresponds
to the number of frames selected by the experts, when building the
ground truth summaries, that is, P = T . In this way, the summary
shown to the graders is a truncation of the final ranked list of
images. In our case, the experts decided the length of the automatic
summary to be a percentage of the length of the whole event. Note
that developing an automatic system to establish the length of the
summary is out of the scope of this paper.

Additionally, the selected images are sorted in the summary
according to their temporal time stamps. This final sorting helps
the user to reconstruct the story between the images to have a
better understanding of the event.

An online platform was developed for the experts to evaluate our
results. In a first round of questionnaires, we wanted to compare
the result of our diversity method using ImageNet or Places as a
similarity criterion (see Equation (1)). For each event, the question-
naire first shows all the images belonging to the event, and then
the user has to answer the questions Is the summary representative
of the event? and Which summary do you prefer? for each similarity
method (using ImageNet or Places).

On the second questionnaire the expert had to give a grade to
each of the presented ranked summaries. The three summaries
correspond respectively to: our approach, a uniform sampling of
images as a lower-bound example, and the ground truth summaries
constructed by the same experts two months earlier as an upper-
bound of the performance score. The order in which the different
summaries are shown is also randomly chosen for each event to
avoid again any bias due to the sorting.

In this case, a comparison between the three types of summaries
is obtained by asking the experts to grade each solution from 1
(worst) to 5 (best). This data collected allowed the computation of
the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) for each configuration (see section
5.3).

5 RESULTS
Two types of experiments validate the presented results: one for the
informativeness filtering and a second one using online question-
naires for the relevance, diversity and novelty on the final visual
summaries. In both cases, the evaluation was based on the feedback
provided by the experts.

5.1 Informativeness Filtering
To validate how successful is our algorithm to filter non-informative
frames, we applied a 10-fold (a day set out) cross-validation. For all
the experiments, we used the following parameters: base_lr = 10−8,
=
lr _policy = ”step”, дamma = 0.1, stepsize = 3000, blobs_lrf c6
=
= blobs_lrconv5×8 and blobs_lrf c8
blobs_lrconv5×5, blobs_lrf c7
blobs_lrconv5 × 10. In Table 1, we present the validation accuracy
obtained on each of the sets and the number of iterations applied to
achieve the best result. After having the networks trained for each
cross-validation, we evaluated the general average performance in
terms of Accuracy, Precision, Recall and F-Measure for different
informativeness score threshold values2. As we can see, we are able
to obtain the highest F-Measure value, when we filter images with
an in f ormativenessScore < 0.025. In Fig. 7, we show the Precision-
Recall curves for all thresholds, obtaining the best results with
respect to the F-Measure of: F Measure = 0.881, Accuracy = 0.846,
Precision = 0.84 and Recall = 0.926 with threshold = 0.05.

Figure 7: Precision-Recall curve for different informative-
ness score threshold values (a small subset of them are
shown in black dots) for all the sets.

5.2 Diversity
Fig. 8 illustrates qualitatively the differences obtained when in-
troducing diversity to the ranked list. As we can see, when we
introduce the novelty re-ranking step, we are able not only to ob-
tain a more visually acceptable set of images, but also to describe
with pictures everything that is happening during the whole event.
Thus, we are able to avoid focusing on a single set of high relevant
images that picture the same concept, activity or background.

2If the informativeness score of a sample is below the threshold, it will be considered
non-informative.

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

Table 1: Best validation accuracy on each set and the respective number of training iterations performed to achieve the results.
SubjX represents the anonymized sets for a given Subject.

Accuracy
Iteration #

SubjA1
0.759
3,600

SubjA2
0.841
1,000

SubjB1
0.805
3,600

SubjB2
0.795
3,400

SubjB3
0.799
3,800

SubjC1
0.837
2,600

SubjD1
0.805
2,200

SubjE1
0.867
3,600

SubjF1
0.795
2,400

SubjF2
0.897
18,000

53.19% of the times. The total adds more than 100% because some
summaries were identical for both configurations.

The second round of evaluations aimed to compare our solution
based on ImageNet features with a baseline of uniform sampling
and and upper-bound defined by the summaries in the ground truth.
Experts were asked to grade each visual summary from 1 (worse)
to 5 (best), so we could compute the Mean Opinion Score (MOS)
[35] of each solution. We adopted MOS as a metric given the highly
subjective and complex nature of the task.

Table 2: Mean Opinion Score for ImageNet, ground-truth
and uniform sampling summaries.

Our solution Ground-truth Uniform Sampling

4,57

4,94

3,99

The performance obtained by uniform sampling (3.99/5) is truly
commendable, since this score can be interpreted as a good solution.
The results obtained with our solution are also satisfactory, because
they are closer to the ground-truth than to the uniform sampling.
Experts have shown coherence with their ground-truth giving a
4.94 of Mean Opinion Score.

6 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we presented a novel approach for semantic summa-
rization of egocentric photo stream events, constructed as a ranked
list of general semantic criteria. Our method is based on two main
criteria: relevance to optimize semantic diversity in the summary,
and novelty to avoid redundancy in the final result. After applying a
pre-processing step to filter non-informative images through a new
CNN-based method, relevance diversity-aware ranking is obtained
by integrating state of the art techniques for saliency detection, ob-
ject recognition and face detection. This list is re-ranked to reduce
redundancy so that each image of the truncated list differs as much
as possible from its predecessors. We proposed a new soft metric to
rank the informative frames and construct the final summary that
does not penalize summaries equivalent (very similar, but not coin-
ciding exactly) to the ground truth. Experimental results indicate
high acceptance and satisfaction of psychologists achieving mean
opinion score of 4.57 out of 5.0.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by contracts SGR1219 and SGR1421 by
the Catalan AGAUR office, and TIN2012-38187-C03-01 and TEC2013-
43935-R by the Spanish Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad
and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF). We ac-
knowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation for the donation of
GPUs.

Figure 8: Three examples of the top 5 images obtained before
introducing diversity (uneven rows) and after introducing it
(even rows).

5.3 Ranking Summary Quality
The first round of blind taste tests posed two questions for each
event. Firstly, experts decided whether each presented summary
was representative, and secondly, they chose the preferred one
Given the question Is the summary representative of the event?, in
95.74% the experts agreed with our solution, using the ImageNet
features to compute the similarity in the novelty-based re-ranking.
Using the other alternative, features from Places CNN, the obtained
result was 94.33%. We conclude that our approach generates repre-
sentative summavery high portion of events.

The second question asked was: Which summary do you prefer?
and experts had to choose their preferred summary, allowing just
one answer. The solution based on Imagenet features was chosen
in 59.57% of teh cases, while the one based on Places was selected

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

REFERENCES
[1] Omid Aghazadeh, Josephine Sullivan, and Stefan Carlsson. 2011. Novelty detec-
tion from an ego-centric perspective. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2011 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 3297–3304.

[2] Michael Blighe, Aiden Doherty, Alan F. Smeaton, and Noel E. O’Connor. 2008.
Keyframe Detection in Visual Lifelogs. In Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments (PETRA
’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 55, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1389586.1389652

[3] Marc Bolaños, Ricard Mestre, Estefanía Talavera, Xavier Giró-i Nieto, and Petia
Radeva. 2015. Visual Summary of Egocentric Photostreams by Representative
Keyframes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.01130 (2015).

[4] Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The Use of MMR, Diversity-based
Reranking for Reordering Documents and Producing Summaries. In Proceedings of
the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’98). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 335–336. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/290941.291025

[5] Charles LA Clarke, Maheedhar Kolla, Gordon V Cormack, Olga Vechtomova,
Azin Ashkan, Stefan Büttcher, and Ian MacKinnon. 2008. Novelty and diversity
in information retrieval evaluation. In Proceedings of the 31st annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM,
659–666.

[6] Duc-Tien Dang-Nguyen, Luca Piras, Giorgio Giacinto, Giulia Boato, and FGB
De Natale. 2014. Retrieval of Diverse Images by Pre-filtering and Hierarchical
Clustering. Working Notes of MediaEval (2014).

[7] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. Ima-
genet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009. IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 248–255.

[8] Thomas Deselaers, Tobias Gass, Philippe Dreuw, and Hermann Ney. 2009. Jointly
Optimising Relevance and Diversity in Image Retrieval. In Proceedings of the
ACM International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval (CIVR ’09). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, Article 39, 8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1646396.1646443
[9] Thomas Deselaers, Tobias Gass, Philippe Dreuw, and Hermann Ney. 2009. Jointly
optimising relevance and diversity in image retrieval. In Proceedings of the ACM
international conference on image and video retrieval. ACM, 39.

[10] Aiden R. Doherty, Daragh Byrne, Alan F. Smeaton, Gareth J.F. Jones, and Mark
Hughes. 2008. Investigating Keyframe Selection Methods in the Novel Domain
of Passively Captured Visual Lifelogs. In Proceedings of the 2008 International
Conference on Content-based Image and Video Retrieval (CIVR ’08). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 259–268. https://doi.org/10.1145/1386352.1386389

[11] Joydeep Ghosh, Yong Jae Lee, and Kristen Grauman. 2012. Discovering important
people and objects for egocentric video summarization. In 2012 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE, 1346–1353.

[12] Boqing Gong, Wei-Lun Chao, Kristen Grauman, and Fei Sha. 2014. Di-
verse Sequential Subset Selection for Supervised Video Summarization.
In Advances
Information Processing Systems 27, Z. Ghahra-
mani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N.D. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger
(Eds.). Curran Associates,
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
5413-diverse-sequential-subset-selection-for-supervised-video-summarization.
pdf

Inc., 2069–2077.

in Neural

[13] Michael Gygli, Helmut Grabner, Hayko Riemenschneider, and Luc Van Gool.
2014. Creating summaries from user videos. In European conference on computer
vision. Springer, 505–520.

[14] Steve Hodges, Lyndsay Williams, Emma Berry, Shahram Izadi, James Srinivasan,
Alex Butler, Gavin Smyth, Narinder Kapur, and Ken Wood. 2006. SenseCam: A
Retrospective Memory Aid. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp’06). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 177–
193. https://doi.org/10.1007/11853565_11

[15] Judy Hoffman, Sergio Guadarrama, Eric Tzeng, Jeff Donahue, Ross B. Girshick,
Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. 2014. LSDA: Large Scale Detection Through
Adaptation. CoRR abs/1407.5035 (2014). http://arxiv.org/abs/1407.5035

[16] Bogdan Ionescu, Adrian Popescu, Mihai Lupu, Alexandru L Gınsca, and Henning
Müller. 2014. Retrieving diverse social images at mediaeval 2014: Challenge,
dataset and evaluation. In MediaEval 2014 Workshop, Barcelona, Spain.

[17] Yangqing Jia, Evan Shelhamer, Jeff Donahue, Sergey Karayev, Jonathan Long,
Ross Girshick, Sergio Guadarrama, and Trevor Darrell. 2014. Caffe: Convolutional
architecture for fast feature embedding. In Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Multimedia. ACM, 675–678.

[18] Amornched Jinda-Apiraksa, Jana Machajdik, and Robert Sablatnig. 2012. A
keyframe selection of lifelog image sequences. Erasmus Mundus M. Sc. in Visions
and Robotics thesis, Vienna University of Technology (TU Wien) (2012).

[19] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. 2012. Imagenet classifica-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems. 1097–1105.

[20] Alex Kulesza and Ben Taskar. 2012. Determinantal point processes for machine

learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.6083 (2012).

[21] Matthew L. Lee and Anind K. Dey. 2008. Lifelogging Memory Appliance for
People with Episodic Memory Impairment. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
44–53. https://doi.org/10.1145/1409635.1409643

[22] Zheng Lu and Kristen Grauman. 2013. Story-driven summarization for egocentric
video. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2013 IEEE Conference
on. IEEE, 2714–2721.

[23] S. Mann. 1998. ’WearCam’ (The wearable camera): personal imaging systems for
long-term use in wearable tetherless computer-mediated reality and personal
photo/videographic memory prosthesis. In Wearable Computers, 1998. Digest of
Papers. Second International Symposium on. 124–131. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ISWC.1998.729538

[24] W. W. Mayol, B. J. Tordoff, and D. W. Murray. 2002. Wearable Visual Robots.
Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 6, 1 (Jan. 2002), 37–48. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s007790200004

[25] Mark Montague and Javed A Aslam. 2001. Relevance score normalization for
metasearch. In Proceedings of the tenth international conference on Information
and knowledge management. ACM, 427–433.

[26] Junting Pan, Kevin McGuinness, and Xavier Giró-i Nieto. 2016. End-to-end

Convolutional Network for Saliency Prediction. In Submitted to CVPR.

[27] P. Piasek, K. Irving, and A.F. Smeaton. 2011. SenseCam intervention based on
Cognitive Stimulation Therapy framework for early-stage dementia. In Pervasive
Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2011 5th International
Conference on. 522–525.

[28] Paulina Piasek, Alan F Smeaton, et al. 2014. Using lifelogging to help construct

the identity of people with dementia. (2014).

[29] Sachan Priyamvada Rajendra and N Keshaveni. 2014. A survey of automatic
video summarization techniques. International Journal of Electronics, Electrical
and Computational System 2 (2014).

[30] M Elena Renda and Umberto Straccia. 2003. Web metasearch: rank vs. score
based rank aggregation methods. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM symposium on
Applied computing. ACM, 841–846.

[31] Abigail J. Sellen, Andrew Fogg, Mike Aitken, Steve Hodges, Carsten Rother, and
Ken Wood. 2007. Do Life-logging Technologies Support Memory for the Past?:
An Experimental Study Using Sensecam. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’07). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
81–90. https://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240636

[32] Kai Song, Yonghong Tian, Wen Gao, and Tiejun Huang. 2006. Diversifying the
Image Retrieval Results. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual ACM International
Conference on Multimedia (MULTIMEDIA ’06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 707–710.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1180639.1180789

[33] Aimee Spector, Lene Thorgrimsen, Bob Woods, Lindsay Royan, Steve Davies,
Margaret Butterworth (deceased), and Martin Orrell. 2003. Efficacy of an evidence-
based cognitive stimulation therapy programme for people with dementia. The
British Journal of Psychiatry 183, 3 (2003), 248–254. https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.
183.3.248

[34] Eleftherios Spyromitros-Xioufis, Symeon Papadopoulos, Yiannis Kompatsiaris,
and Ioannis Vlahavas. 2014. SocialSensor: Finding Diverse Images at MediaEval
2014. (2014).

[35] Robert C Streijl, Stefan Winkler, and David S Hands. 2016. Mean opinion score
(MOS) revisited: methods and applications, limitations and alternatives. Multi-
media Systems 22, 2 (2016), 213–227.

[36] Estefania Talavera, Mariella Dimiccoli, Marc Bolaños, Maedeh Aghaei, and Petia
Radeva. 2015. R-clustering for egocentric video segmentation. In Pattern Recog-
nition and Image Analysis. Springer, 327–336.

[37] Reinier H. van Leuken, Lluis Garcia, Ximena Olivares, and Roelof van Zwol.
2009. Visual Diversification of Image Search Results. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW ’09). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 341–350. https://doi.org/10.1145/1526709.1526756

[38] Cheng Xiang Zhai, William W Cohen, and John Lafferty. 2003. Beyond inde-
pendent relevance: methods and evaluation metrics for subtopic retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 26th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research
and development in informaion retrieval. ACM, 10–17.

[39] Xiangxin Zhu and Deva Ramanan. 2012. Face detection, pose estimation, and
landmark localization in the wild. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2012 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 2879–2886.

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

Aniol Lidon
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Catalonia/Spain

Marc Bolaños
Universitat de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
marc.bolanos@ub.edu

Mariella Dimiccoli
Universitat de Barcelona
Computer Vision Center
Barcelona, Spain
mariella.dimiccolig@cvc.uab.es

Petia Radeva
Universitat de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
petia.radeva@ub.edu

Maite Garolera
Consorci Sanitari de Terrassa
Terrassa, Spain
maite.garolera@cst.cat

Xavier Giro-i-Nieto
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Catalonia/Spain
xavier.giro@upc.edu

7
1
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
1
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
8
3
4
0
0
.
1
1
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
With the rapid increase of users of wearable cameras in recent
years and of the amount of data they produce, there is a strong
need for automatic retrieval and summarization techniques. This
work addresses the problem of automatically summarizing egocen-
tric photo streams captured through a wearable camera by taking
an image retrieval perspective. After removing non-informative
images by a new CNN-based filter, images are ranked by rele-
vance to ensure semantic diversity and finally re-ranked by a nov-
elty criterion to reduce redundancy. To assess the results, a new
evaluation metric is proposed which takes into account the non-
uniqueness of the solution. Experimental results applied on a data-
base of 7,110 images from 6 different subjects and evaluated by
experts gave 95.74% of experts satisfaction and a Mean Opinion
Score of 4.57 out of 5.0. Source code to reproduce this work is
available at https://github.com/imatge-upc/egocentric-2017-lta.

ACM Reference format:
Aniol Lidon, Marc Bolaños, Mariella Dimiccoli, Petia Radeva, Maite Garolera,
and Xavier Giro-i-Nieto. 2017. Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo
Stream Events. In Proceedings of LTA’17, Mountain View, CA, USA, October
23, 2017, 9 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3133202.3133204

1 INTRODUCTION
From smartphones to wearable devices, digital cameras are becom-
ing ubiquitous. This process is being accompanied by the progres-
sive reduction of digital storage cost, making it possible to collect
large amounts of high-quality pictures in a easy and affordable way.
This situation arises a number of natural questions: how to manage
this large amount of pictures? Do we really need to store all of
them? Summarization, the process of generating a proper, compact
and meaningful representation of a given image collection through
a subset of representative images, is crucial to help managing and

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA
© 2017 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5503-2/17/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3133202.3133204

Figure 1: Example of temporal neighbouring images ac-
quired by a wearable photo camera.

browsing efficiently large volumes of video content. Although sum-
marization is not a new research topic in Computer Vision [13, 29],
it is still a largely open problem.

Our goal in this paper is to address the summarization prob-
lem focusing on a particular scenario: the one of analyzing photo
streams acquired through a wearable camera. Motivation for this
work is given by the explosion of the number of wearable camera
users in recent years and, consequently, by the huge amount of
data they produce. To record daily experiences from an egocentric,
first-person perspective is a trend that has been growing progres-
sively since 1998, when Steve Mann proposed the WearCam [23]. In
2000, Mayol et al. proposed a necklace-like lifelogging device [24]
and, in 2006, Microsoft Research started to commercialize the first
egocentric lifelogging portable camera, the SenseCam, for research
purposes [14].

Several authors [21, 27, 28, 31] have studied the benefits of lifel-
ogging cues such as egocentric images to help people with dementia
to enhance their memory or to help them remember about their
forgotten past. Sellen et al. [31] showed that episodic details from
a visual ’lifelog’ can be presented to users as memory cues to assist
them in remembering the details of their original experience. To
support people with dementia, Piasek et al. [27] introduced the
"SenseCam Therapy" as a therapeutic approach similar to the well
established "Cognitive Stimulation Theraphy" [33]. Participants
were asked to wear SenseCam in order to collect images of events
from their everyday lives, then images were reviewed with a trained
therapist.

However, lifelogging technologies produce huge amounts of
data (thousands of images per day) that should be reviewed by
both patients and caregivers. To be efficient, lifelogging systems
need to summarize the most relevant information in the images. On
the other hand, in order to make possible the recording of images
from the whole day, it is necessary to use wearable cameras with
low temporal resolution (2 fpm). The peculiarity of these image
collections is that, due to the low-temporal resolution of the camera

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

and to the free motion of its wearer, temporally adjacent images may
be very different in appearance even if they belong to the same event
and should therefore be grouped together. For instance, during a
meeting, the people the camera wearer is interacting with and the
objects around them may change their position and frequently
appear occluded (see Fig. 1).

As a consequence of this, taking the semantics into account is
crucial to summarize egocentric sequences acquired by a low tempo-
ral resolution camera. This paper proposes a method to summarize
each of the events present in a daily egocentric sequence, aiming
at preserving semantic information and diversity, while reducing
the total number of images. The method consists of three major
steps: first, non-informative images are removed; second, they are
ranked by semantic relevance; and finally, a new re-rank is applied
by enforcing diversity among the chosen subset of pictures. Our
contributions can be summarized as follows:

(1) Propose a CNN-based informativeness estimator for egocen-

tric images.

images.

(2) Define a set of semantic relevance criteria for egocentric

(3) Formulate the summarization task as a retrieval problem by
combining informativeness, relevance and novelty criteria.
(4) Define a soft metric to assess the novelty from partially

annotated image datasets.

(5) Our results have been validated by medical experts with
the aim of being used in a cognitive training framework
to reinforce the memory of patients with mild cognitive
impairment.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the next section
reviews the related work, section 3 details the proposed method,
section 4 describes our experimental setup, section 5 presents the
experimental results and finally, section 6 ends the paper with some
concluding remarks. Source code to reproduce this work is available
at https://github.com/imatge-upc/egocentric-2017-lta.

2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Summarization by key-frame selection in

Lifelogging

Egocentric photo stream summarization has been traditionally for-
mulated as the problem of grouping lifelog images into coherent
collections (or events) by: first, extracting low-level spatio-temporal
features and then, selecting the most representative image from
each event. In this spirit, many authors proposed different strate-
gies for temporal segmentation and key-frame selection. Doherty
et al. [10] proposed a key-frame selection technique, which seeks to
select the image with the highest ’quality’ as key-frame by relying
on five types of features: contrast, color variance, global sharpness,
noise, saliency and external sensors data (accelerometers and light).
In addition to image quality, Blighe et al. [2] considered image sim-
ilarity to select a key-frame in an event. Basically, after applying
an image quality filter that removes all poor quality images, they
selected the image which has the highest average similarity to all
other images in the event as the key-frame. In that case, similarity
was measured relying on the distance of SIFT descriptors. In [18],
the key-frame is selected by a nearest neighbour ratio strategy that

favors high quality images and, if the difference in quality is not
large enough, favors images closer to the middle of the temporal
segment. More recently, the auhors in [3] proposed to use a Random
Walk for selecting a single and most representative image for each
temporal segment.

While these methods rely solely on low-level or mid-level fea-
tures for the temporal segmentation and key-frame detection, a
few recent works have introduced a higher semantic level in the
selection process for video cameras. Although, in this cases, due to
the higher temporal resolution of the camera (about 30fps), aiming
at selecting subshots (short video sub-sequences) instead of unique
key-frames. Lu and Grauman [22] and lately Ghosh et al. [11] sug-
gested that video summarization should preserve the narrative
character of a visual lifelog and, therefore, it should ideally be made
of a coherent chain of video subshots in which each subshot influ-
ences the next through some subset of key visual objects. Following
this idea, in [11, 22], first important people and objects are discov-
ered based on their interaction time with the camera wearer and
then, a subshot selection driven by key-object event occurrences is
applied. Subshot selection is performed by incorporating into an
objective function a term corresponding to the influence between
subshots as well as image diversity. To model diversity, the authors
relied on GIST descriptors and color histograms to model scenes
and proposed a measure of diversity that is high when the scenes
in sequential subshots are dissimilar to ensure visual uniqueness.
Visual diversity in lifelog summaries is modeled in [1] through
the concept of novelty, which the authors heuristically defined as
the deviation from some standard background. According to this
definition, novelty is detected based on the absence of a good reg-
istration, in terms of ego-motion and the environment, between a
new sequence and stored reference sequences. More recently, Gong
et al. [12] proposed the so called Sequential Determinantal Point
Process (seqDPP) approach for video summarization, a probabilistic
model with the ability to teach the system how to select informa-
tive and diverse subsets from human-created summaries, so as to
best fit human-perception quality based on evaluation metrics. This
work is an adaptation to sequences of [20], which is able to capture
the strong dependency structures between items in sequences. It
is worth to mention that all these works have been conceived to
deal with video data, where, assuming that the temporal segmenta-
tion is good, temporal coherence and frame redundancy make the
key-frame selection process easier.

2.2 Diversity and novelty in information

retrieval

One of the first works that tried to approach the problem of obtain-
ing a diverse set of elements was presented in 1998 by Carbonell &
Goldstain [4]. Their proposal, which was applied to the context of
text retrieval and summarization, aimed at obtaining results highly
relevant for the query, but presenting a low redundancy. They de-
fine the marginal relevance as the linear combination of relevance
and novelty, measured independently. They aimed at maximizing it
iteratively, defining this way what they call the Maximal Marginal
Relevance (MMR).

A similar formulation to MMR of the diversification problem was
given more recently by Deselaers et al. [8] in the problem of image

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

Figure 2: General scheme of our event summarization methodology.

retrieval. Likewise, they jointly optimized the relevance and the
diversity of the query, although reformulating the general solution
by incorporating dynamic programming techniques to the initial
proposal.

Diversity in social image retrieval was one of the focus of the Me-
diaEval 2013, 2014 and 2015 benchmarks and attracted the interest
of many groups working in this area. Most participants developed
diversification approaches that combined clustering with a key-
frame selection strategy to extract representative images for each
cluster. Spyromitros et al. proposed an MMR-based approach [34]
that jointly considers relevance and diversity, but using a super-
vised classification model to obtain the relevance scores learned
from the user feedback. The contribution from Dang-Nguyen et al.
[6] was to filter out non-relevant images at the beginning of the
process before applying diversity, hence simplifying it.

In [32], the authors presented a method for detecting and resolv-
ing the ambiguity of a query based on the textual features of the
image collection. If a query has an ambiguous nature, this ambigu-
ity should be reflected in the diversity of the result to increase user
satisfaction. Leuken et al. [37] proposed to reduce the ambiguity
of results provided by image search engines relying on textual de-
scriptions by seeking for the visual diversification of image search
results. This is achieved by clustering the retrieved images based
on their visual similarity and by selecting a representative image
for each cluster. In these works ’diversity’ is aimed at addressing
the ’ambiguity’ of the textual descriptions (tags) in queries rather
than avoiding redundancy in search results. The same terminol-
ogy is used by [5], where the term ’novelty’ is meant to address
redundancy in the retrieved documents. In this work we will use
the terms novelty and diversity as defined in [5].

3 METHODOLOGY
Inspired by the image retrieval work, we question which would be
the most suitable diversity and relevance criteria applied on ego-
centric images that kept the narrative character of the visual lifelog.
Taking into account that the images are acquired non-intentionally,
it is important to disregard the non-informative images (see Section
3.1) and keep the minimal set that represents the visual event. In
this section, we explain the four main steps applied to construct
the final resulting summary (see Fig. 2):

(1) Informativeness Filtering (Section 3.1): egocentric images
are acquired non-intentionally and therefore, many of them may be
non-informative, capturing neither (or partially) objects nor people,
or being blurred or dark. By means of a CNN-based informativeness
filtering method, we discard most of the non-informative images
from the egocentric event.

(2) Relevance and Diversity-aware Ranking (Section 3.2): an
initial relevance image ranking is computed taking into account
different criteria such as Saliency and Objectness for dealing with
the ambiguity or under-specification of queries like What is the user
doing?, or Where is the user?, and Face Detection for answering the
question With whom is the user most likely interacting?.

(3) Novelty-based Re-ranking (Section 3.3): a final re-ranking
based on a novelty-maximization procedure is applied on the images
already ranked by relevance. This step is crucial to select those
images that represent the most varied set of concepts appearing
avoiding redundancy without semantic loss.

(4) Estimation of Fusion Weights with Mean Sum of Max-
imal Similarities (Section 3.4): in this step, we define a novel soft
metric, which we call Mean Sum of Maximal Similarities (MSMS),
in order to define the priorities of the different relevance terms and
construct the final summary.

3.1 Informativeness Filtering
Considering both the free motion of egocentric cameras and the
non-intentionality of the pictures they take, several problems are in-
herent to them as over- or under-light exposure, blurriness, pictures
of the sky or ground, pictures where possible objects of interest
are badly centered in the image or even non-existent, etc. Such
images are considered as non-informative pictures. A way to avoid
a good amount of the undesired images in the final summary and
also to boost the performance of the next steps in our methodology,
would be being able to discriminate the informative pictures. Fig.
3 illustrates informative vs. non-informative photos taken by the
wearable camera.

In order to learn a model of informative pictures, and taking
into account the complexity of distinguishing visually whether an
image is informative enough or not, we propose training a CNN
for a binary problem. Thus, all the images with an undesired ar-
tifact (empty image, blurred image, image with small amount of
information, image where something occludes most of the image

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

Figure 3: Examples of informative images (top) and non-
informative images (bottom) belonging to the same events.
Faces appearing in the images have been manually blurred
for privacy concerns.

Figure 4: Images acquired by a lifelogging device, where ob-
jects of interest appear like: computer, mobile, coffee, hand,
bicycle, person, face, flower, apple, etc.

region, sky, ground, ceiling, room wall, etc.) will be considered
non-informative (label 0), and the rest (images with semantic con-
tent) will be considered informative (label 1). With this procedure,
we will be able to extract an informativeness score for each image
and filter the unuseful ones. In order to remove as many images
as possible, but with the ultimate goal of having a very high re-
call (always try to keep any informative image for the next steps),
we only discard the images with in f ormativenessScore < 0.025,
which correspond to the ones that are considered non-informative
for certain by the CNN (see experimental results in section 5.1).

The network training for the binary class distinction is performed
by fine-tuning the CaffeNet [19] pre-trained on the ImageNet [7]
dataset, provided in the software Caffe [17].

3.2 Relevance and Diversity-aware Ranking
Once non-informative images are discarded, we proceed to rank
the remaining images by considering a relevance criteria. Our so-
lution formulates the summarization problem in similar terms as
in information retrieval. A ranked list of event frames is generated
in such a way that a summary of T images directly corresponds to
a truncation of the ranked list of N elements at its T -th position.
Classic retrieval problems build their ranked lists as a response
to a user query, in the summarization of events, this query would
correspond to: Select T images to describe the event depicted into
these N frames. This query is highly ambiguous as an event can be
described from different perspectives. For example, an egocentric vi-
sual summary of an event may respond to multiple intentions, such
as: Where is the user? What activity is the user performing? With
whom is the user interacting? We hypothesize that the relevance of
each image with respect to these questions can be estimated with
computer vision tools for saliency prediction, detection of objects
and detection of faces.

3.2.1

Saliency Prediction for image relevance. We assume that
images with more salient content are relevant and should have a
higher probability to be included in the summary. Visual saliency

can be triggered by a broad range of reasons, such as objects, people
or characteristic features appearing in the picture. Many computer
vision algorithms try to estimate the fixation points of the human
eyes in a scene by means of saliency maps. These are heat maps of
the same size of the image, whose higher values correspond to the
image locations with a higher probability of capturing the human
visual attention.

In this work, we compute the saliency maps with SalNet [26], an
end-to-end convolutional network for saliency prediction. We adopt
the overall sum of the values in the saliency map as a quantitative
estimator of the image relevance.

3.2.2 Object Detection for image relevance. We assume that
those images containing objects are relevant since these objects
likely correspond to the ones the user is interacting with. These
objects would address the question of What is the user doing? (see
Fig. 4). In addition, introducing a semantic interpretation of the
scene, targets the summary from a higher abstraction level than
saliency maps.

In our work, we used the off-the-shelf tool Large Scale Detection
through Adaptation (LSDA) presented in [15]. This object detector is
based on a CNN fine-tuned for local scale and provides a semantic
label and a confidence score in the localization of the objects in the
scene.

This tool allows to estimate the relevance of each frame by sum-
ming the detection scores of all objects in the picture, so that the
frames with higher confidence detection will be considered as more
relevant.

3.2.3

Face Detection for image relevance. We assume that im-
ages containing people are also relevant, since these people likely
correspond to the ones the user is interacting with, and they would
be useful to answer the question With whom is the user interacting?.
Therefore, a face detector complements the object detector into
providing a cue for the user social interactions during the event.

In our solution, we adopted the off-the-shelf face detector by
Zhu et al. [39], which provides a confidence for each of the detected
faces. The relevance of each frame in terms of social interaction was
estimated by summing the confidence scores of the face detectors.
In the particular implementation of [39], detection scores may also
be described with negative values, so we actually used these scores
in an exponential sum, which conveniently deals with the negative
scores as well as encourages the selection of frames with multiple
detected faces.

3.2.4 Diversity-aware Ranking. The three criteria used for the
relevance detailed above allow to cope with the ambiguity of the
query, since they estimate the relevance from three different per-
spectives. The relevance scores computed for each case are then
used to build three ranked lists that will be combined into a single
one. This combination is based on generating a set of normalized
scores based simply on the position of the frames. Normalized scores
rk (x) are linearly distributed from the top (1 for most relevant) to
the bottom (0 for non relevant) of the ranked list as follows:

rk (x) = M − Rk (x)
M − 1
where Rk (x) = 1, . . . , M is the ranking position associated with
image x according to each relevance criterion k ∈ {1, 2, 3} and M

,

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

is the number of informative frames in the event, being M < N
and N the total number of images in the event. The standard score
normalization [25, 30] with the min and max scores was also tested
giving similar results, so the rank-based normalization was adopted
to save computational resources.

3.3 Novelty-based Re-ranking
The relevance and diversity-aware ranked list sorts the informa-
tive images combining different criteria for relevance, but does
not explicitly cope with the redundancy in the information. Fur-
ther processing is necessary to maximize the novelty provided by
each image with respect to the rest in the summary. In information
retrieval, novelty is defined as a quality of a system that avoids
redundancy [5]. In our approach for building a summary by trun-
cating a ranked list of images, introducing novelty implies that
each image in the list should differ as much as possible from its
predecessors.

Our approach adopts the greedy selection algorithm presented
by Deselaers et. al [9] to re-rank the fused list based on novelty. The
goal of our summarization algorithm is to analyze the input set of
informative and ranked images X = {x1, ...xM } to iteratively build
another set with minimal redundancy, say YT = {xy1 , ...xyT },
where T ≤ M. Our approach starts by selecting the top ranked
image x1 in the diversity-aware ranked list as the first element of
Y, that is Y1 = {xy1 }. The novelty of each candidate image, x ∗ to
be added to the summary at iteration t = 2, ...,T is defined as:

n(x ∗, Yt ) = 1 − s(x ∗, Yt ) = 1 − max
xyj ∈Yt

(1)
s(x ∗, xyj ) is a normalized similarity measure between the candidate
x ∗ and image xyj . In this way, the more different a new image is
with respect to the ones in Yt , the higher its novelty is.

s(x ∗, xyj )

In our work, the similarity s(x ∗, xyj ) is based on visual appear-
ance. Each image is described by a feature vector corresponding
to the seventh fully-connected layer of the CaffeNet convolutional
neural network [17], which was also used as initialization for the
informativeness (see section 3.1), and whose architecture was in-
spired by AlexNet [19] and trained with the ImageNet dataset [7].
The similarity score is computed with the Euclidean distance of the
feature vectors.

The summary of the event is built by combining the relevance
and the novelty of the candidate frames, x ∗. A greedy selection
algorithm iteratively chooses the next image in the summary as:

(r (x ∗) + n(x ∗, Yt )),

xyt +1

= arg max
x ∗ ∈X\Yt

Yt +1 = Yt ∪ {xyt +1 }

(2)

that is, the image with the highest sum of relevance and novelty.
We detail the computation of r (x ∗) in Equation (4).

3.4 Estimation of Fusion Weights with Mean

Sum of Maximal Similarities

Different relevance criteria would have different importance for
the final ranking. To this aim, we propose a novel approach to
estimate the priorities of each criterion and fuse them, based on
comparing the similarity of the images from a validation set of

Figure 5: Visual representation of the Sum of Max Similari-
ties when comparing the first T = 3 images from the ranked
list with the P = 3 red, green and blue images from the valida-
tion set. The similarity between images from the validation
set and images from the ranked list is represented as a T × P
matrix of gray level squares, where each square (i, j) of the
matrix represents the similarity between the image i from
the ranked list and the image j from the validation set. High
intensity gray level values indicate high similarity.

P elements V = {xv1 , ..., xvP } with a summary of T elements
YT = {xy1 , ...xyT }.

The Sum of Maximal Similarities (SMS) of V with respect to YT

is defined as:

SMS(V, YT ) = 1
P

P
(cid:213)

i=1

s(xvi , YT )

(3)

where s(xvi , YT ) is the similarity of image xvi from the validation
set with respect to YT . Following this metric, the more similar is
the validation set V to the selected images YT , the highest the
average similarity.

The main advantage of our soft metric presented in Equation
(3) is that automatic summaries, which are very similar to the
validation images, although do not coincide, still will be assessed as
a valid solution. This feature of our soft metric is specially important
when working with sequences of egocentric photo streams, that
usually contain a high amount of redundancy.

Our summaries are built as a truncation of a ranked list, so the
value of SMS depends on T . Fig. 5 shows a schematic example,
where a validation set composed of P = 3 images (represented by
three colors: green, blue and red) is compared with an event of
M = 5 images, which have been previously filtered and ranked
based on our diversity and novelty-aware criterion. In this example,
a summary with T = 3 images is considered. Let us imagine that the
green image from V is matched with the third one in the ranked
list, while the blue and red images are matched with the second
one.

Notice that, as in our set up the validation set V is always a
subset of the input set X, hence, the final average similarity (i.e.
considering the whole sequence,T = M images) for YM will always

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

r (x) =

w(k) rk (x),

(4)

3
(cid:213)

k =1

and the final set of frames is obtained according to the updated
relevance and novelty criteria according to Equation (2).

4 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
4.1 Dataset
The dataset used for validation of our method was acquired with the
wearable camera Narrative Clip (www.getnarrative.com), which
takes a picture every 30 seconds (2 fpm). It is composed of 10 day
lifelogs from 5 different subjects, with a total of 7,110 images1.
Each day has been segmented in between 10 to 25 events manually,
although any automatic segmentation method can be used (e.g. [36]).
The event segmentation separated the pictures in a set of ordered
and relevant semantic events or segments. In this paper, we use this
segmentation as starting point for the semantic summarization.

In order to apply a quantitative evaluation of our method, each
day lifelog was annotated at two levels by psychologists in the
following way:

(1) GT Level 1 - Informativeness: positive or negative label
depending on whether the image is considered informative or non-
informative (see section 3.1). The proportion of images labeled as
informative is 61.22% of the complete dataset.

GT Level 2 - Grouping of similar images: all highly similar
informative images that belong to the same event are grouped
together (see section 3.2.4). This distinction, resembling the one
used in MediaEval 2014 Retrieving diverse social images challenge
[16], intends to provide a way of measuring how many different
clusters/groups from the ground truth are represented among the
results in the final diversity selection.

4.2 Semantic Assessment of Summaries
The assessment of visual summaries is a challenging task due to
the rich semantic content of the images and the ambiguity in the
evaluation criteria. In addition, human annotation is an expensive
resource, which becomes dramatically scarce, when dealing with
tasks that require expert annotations in the domain. In our case, the
ground truth annotations have been performed by psychologists
who defined the event’s summaries from an human-centered point
of view.

We addressed the challenge of summary assessment as follows:
starting from the daily events defined by the psychologists, the
automatic summaries were built for each of the events separately
by using the best configuration of our system. Later, the results
were presented in a blind taste test to the expert annotators.

4.2.1 Validation based on MSMS. The classical methods to eval-
uate summaries cannot be applied in our setup, because they require
the annotation of the full dataset. In a traditional case, each doc-
ument in the ground truth is labeled as relevant or non-relevant
for the summary and, in some cases, also clustered in groups of
redundant items that cover the same sub-topic. Such annotations
allow the definition of metrics like Precision [4] for relevance and

1The link to the dataset and its ground truth are prepared to be made public domain
when the article is published.

Figure 6: MSMS curves and AUC for each relevance criterion
used separately.

correspond to one. Actually, in the example of Fig. 5, SMS must
reach a value of one when all the ranked list is considered, that is,
when T = M.

Let us consider the evolution of the SMS of summary Y as the

parameter t grows (t = 1, 2, . . . , M) defined as:

SMS(V, Y) = {SMS(V, Y1), . . . , SMS(V, YM )}

We construct the SMS curves for all the validation set, interpolate
them, normalize them with respect to the length M of each sequence
and get the average of the curves, one curve for each event in the
validation set. The resulting curve represents the Mean Sum of
Maximal Similarities (MSMS).

Fig. 6 shows three examples of MSMS curves. The curve illus-
trates the evolution of the MSMS as a function of the percentage
of images covered by the visual summary. This curve is defined
over the X -axis representing the proportion of event images rep-
resented in the top t items in the list, that is, plotting the MSMS
over t/M, where M is the amount of already filtered images in the
event. In this way, the curves of events of different lengths M can
be compared on the same plot. The best MSMS curves are those
which reach higher values with the minimal amount of images in
the summary.

Note that the MSMS can be computed for the three relevance
criteria that can give as a quality of performance of each of them.
Hence, we introduce a final refinement in the fusion of the ranked
lists by estimating the confidence of each of the three relevance
criteria and using it to weight the corresponding relevance terms.
Thus, we leverage the contribution of each of the three relevance
criteria based on their stand-alone performance (see Fig. 6). This
weight corresponds to the normalized Area Under the Curve (AUC)
of the MSMS measure.

As a result, the fusion weight w(k) for the relevance criterion k

is estimated as:

w(k) =

AUC(k)
i=1 AUC(i)

.

(cid:205)3

Finally, the three normalized relevance scores associated to each
frame are aggregated with a weighted sum to obtain their fused
score r (x), as described by the following equation:

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

Cluster Recall (or subtopic-recall) [38] for diversity and/or novelty.
However, in other cases (like ours), only a small portion of the
dataset is annotated.

Given this limitation, following the framework of Subsection 3.3,
we propose an evaluation approach based on the similarity of the
images in the ground truth set G = {xд1 , ..., xдP }, when compared
to the automatic summary of T elements, YT = {xy1 , ...xyT }. In
this case, we apply the SMS, SMS(G, YT ) of ground truth G with
respect to the extracted summary, YT . As before, we obtain the
MSMS as the average value, when considering all events in the
dataset of the ground truth, which is finally plotted in the Y -axis
of our evaluation scores. Finally, the AUC is computed to obtain a
quantitative measure of each configuration for the summary.

4.2.2 Blind taste test. The resulting summaries are evaluated
with a blind taste test by the team of experts who generated the
ground truth summaries. This methodology, previously used in
[3, 22], shows different summaries from the same event to the
experts, so they can rate them from a comparative perspective. By
randomly changing the position of the different techniques at each
event, graders are unaware of what technique was used to generate
each of the summaries, guaranteeing this way that their judgments
are not biased towards any of the algorithm components.

The amount of images included in each summary corresponds
to the number of frames selected by the experts, when building the
ground truth summaries, that is, P = T . In this way, the summary
shown to the graders is a truncation of the final ranked list of
images. In our case, the experts decided the length of the automatic
summary to be a percentage of the length of the whole event. Note
that developing an automatic system to establish the length of the
summary is out of the scope of this paper.

Additionally, the selected images are sorted in the summary
according to their temporal time stamps. This final sorting helps
the user to reconstruct the story between the images to have a
better understanding of the event.

An online platform was developed for the experts to evaluate our
results. In a first round of questionnaires, we wanted to compare
the result of our diversity method using ImageNet or Places as a
similarity criterion (see Equation (1)). For each event, the question-
naire first shows all the images belonging to the event, and then
the user has to answer the questions Is the summary representative
of the event? and Which summary do you prefer? for each similarity
method (using ImageNet or Places).

On the second questionnaire the expert had to give a grade to
each of the presented ranked summaries. The three summaries
correspond respectively to: our approach, a uniform sampling of
images as a lower-bound example, and the ground truth summaries
constructed by the same experts two months earlier as an upper-
bound of the performance score. The order in which the different
summaries are shown is also randomly chosen for each event to
avoid again any bias due to the sorting.

In this case, a comparison between the three types of summaries
is obtained by asking the experts to grade each solution from 1
(worst) to 5 (best). This data collected allowed the computation of
the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) for each configuration (see section
5.3).

5 RESULTS
Two types of experiments validate the presented results: one for the
informativeness filtering and a second one using online question-
naires for the relevance, diversity and novelty on the final visual
summaries. In both cases, the evaluation was based on the feedback
provided by the experts.

5.1 Informativeness Filtering
To validate how successful is our algorithm to filter non-informative
frames, we applied a 10-fold (a day set out) cross-validation. For all
the experiments, we used the following parameters: base_lr = 10−8,
=
lr _policy = ”step”, дamma = 0.1, stepsize = 3000, blobs_lrf c6
=
= blobs_lrconv5×8 and blobs_lrf c8
blobs_lrconv5×5, blobs_lrf c7
blobs_lrconv5 × 10. In Table 1, we present the validation accuracy
obtained on each of the sets and the number of iterations applied to
achieve the best result. After having the networks trained for each
cross-validation, we evaluated the general average performance in
terms of Accuracy, Precision, Recall and F-Measure for different
informativeness score threshold values2. As we can see, we are able
to obtain the highest F-Measure value, when we filter images with
an in f ormativenessScore < 0.025. In Fig. 7, we show the Precision-
Recall curves for all thresholds, obtaining the best results with
respect to the F-Measure of: F Measure = 0.881, Accuracy = 0.846,
Precision = 0.84 and Recall = 0.926 with threshold = 0.05.

Figure 7: Precision-Recall curve for different informative-
ness score threshold values (a small subset of them are
shown in black dots) for all the sets.

5.2 Diversity
Fig. 8 illustrates qualitatively the differences obtained when in-
troducing diversity to the ranked list. As we can see, when we
introduce the novelty re-ranking step, we are able not only to ob-
tain a more visually acceptable set of images, but also to describe
with pictures everything that is happening during the whole event.
Thus, we are able to avoid focusing on a single set of high relevant
images that picture the same concept, activity or background.

2If the informativeness score of a sample is below the threshold, it will be considered
non-informative.

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

A. Lidon et al.

Table 1: Best validation accuracy on each set and the respective number of training iterations performed to achieve the results.
SubjX represents the anonymized sets for a given Subject.

Accuracy
Iteration #

SubjA1
0.759
3,600

SubjA2
0.841
1,000

SubjB1
0.805
3,600

SubjB2
0.795
3,400

SubjB3
0.799
3,800

SubjC1
0.837
2,600

SubjD1
0.805
2,200

SubjE1
0.867
3,600

SubjF1
0.795
2,400

SubjF2
0.897
18,000

53.19% of the times. The total adds more than 100% because some
summaries were identical for both configurations.

The second round of evaluations aimed to compare our solution
based on ImageNet features with a baseline of uniform sampling
and and upper-bound defined by the summaries in the ground truth.
Experts were asked to grade each visual summary from 1 (worse)
to 5 (best), so we could compute the Mean Opinion Score (MOS)
[35] of each solution. We adopted MOS as a metric given the highly
subjective and complex nature of the task.

Table 2: Mean Opinion Score for ImageNet, ground-truth
and uniform sampling summaries.

Our solution Ground-truth Uniform Sampling

4,57

4,94

3,99

The performance obtained by uniform sampling (3.99/5) is truly
commendable, since this score can be interpreted as a good solution.
The results obtained with our solution are also satisfactory, because
they are closer to the ground-truth than to the uniform sampling.
Experts have shown coherence with their ground-truth giving a
4.94 of Mean Opinion Score.

6 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we presented a novel approach for semantic summa-
rization of egocentric photo stream events, constructed as a ranked
list of general semantic criteria. Our method is based on two main
criteria: relevance to optimize semantic diversity in the summary,
and novelty to avoid redundancy in the final result. After applying a
pre-processing step to filter non-informative images through a new
CNN-based method, relevance diversity-aware ranking is obtained
by integrating state of the art techniques for saliency detection, ob-
ject recognition and face detection. This list is re-ranked to reduce
redundancy so that each image of the truncated list differs as much
as possible from its predecessors. We proposed a new soft metric to
rank the informative frames and construct the final summary that
does not penalize summaries equivalent (very similar, but not coin-
ciding exactly) to the ground truth. Experimental results indicate
high acceptance and satisfaction of psychologists achieving mean
opinion score of 4.57 out of 5.0.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by contracts SGR1219 and SGR1421 by
the Catalan AGAUR office, and TIN2012-38187-C03-01 and TEC2013-
43935-R by the Spanish Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad
and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF). We ac-
knowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation for the donation of
GPUs.

Figure 8: Three examples of the top 5 images obtained before
introducing diversity (uneven rows) and after introducing it
(even rows).

5.3 Ranking Summary Quality
The first round of blind taste tests posed two questions for each
event. Firstly, experts decided whether each presented summary
was representative, and secondly, they chose the preferred one
Given the question Is the summary representative of the event?, in
95.74% the experts agreed with our solution, using the ImageNet
features to compute the similarity in the novelty-based re-ranking.
Using the other alternative, features from Places CNN, the obtained
result was 94.33%. We conclude that our approach generates repre-
sentative summavery high portion of events.

The second question asked was: Which summary do you prefer?
and experts had to choose their preferred summary, allowing just
one answer. The solution based on Imagenet features was chosen
in 59.57% of teh cases, while the one based on Places was selected

Semantic Summarization of Egocentric Photo Stream Events

LTA’17, October 23, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA

REFERENCES
[1] Omid Aghazadeh, Josephine Sullivan, and Stefan Carlsson. 2011. Novelty detec-
tion from an ego-centric perspective. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2011 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 3297–3304.

[2] Michael Blighe, Aiden Doherty, Alan F. Smeaton, and Noel E. O’Connor. 2008.
Keyframe Detection in Visual Lifelogs. In Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments (PETRA
’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 55, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1389586.1389652

[3] Marc Bolaños, Ricard Mestre, Estefanía Talavera, Xavier Giró-i Nieto, and Petia
Radeva. 2015. Visual Summary of Egocentric Photostreams by Representative
Keyframes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.01130 (2015).

[4] Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The Use of MMR, Diversity-based
Reranking for Reordering Documents and Producing Summaries. In Proceedings of
the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’98). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 335–336. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/290941.291025

[5] Charles LA Clarke, Maheedhar Kolla, Gordon V Cormack, Olga Vechtomova,
Azin Ashkan, Stefan Büttcher, and Ian MacKinnon. 2008. Novelty and diversity
in information retrieval evaluation. In Proceedings of the 31st annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM,
659–666.

[6] Duc-Tien Dang-Nguyen, Luca Piras, Giorgio Giacinto, Giulia Boato, and FGB
De Natale. 2014. Retrieval of Diverse Images by Pre-filtering and Hierarchical
Clustering. Working Notes of MediaEval (2014).

[7] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. Ima-
genet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009. IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 248–255.

[8] Thomas Deselaers, Tobias Gass, Philippe Dreuw, and Hermann Ney. 2009. Jointly
Optimising Relevance and Diversity in Image Retrieval. In Proceedings of the
ACM International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval (CIVR ’09). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, Article 39, 8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1646396.1646443
[9] Thomas Deselaers, Tobias Gass, Philippe Dreuw, and Hermann Ney. 2009. Jointly
optimising relevance and diversity in image retrieval. In Proceedings of the ACM
international conference on image and video retrieval. ACM, 39.

[10] Aiden R. Doherty, Daragh Byrne, Alan F. Smeaton, Gareth J.F. Jones, and Mark
Hughes. 2008. Investigating Keyframe Selection Methods in the Novel Domain
of Passively Captured Visual Lifelogs. In Proceedings of the 2008 International
Conference on Content-based Image and Video Retrieval (CIVR ’08). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 259–268. https://doi.org/10.1145/1386352.1386389

[11] Joydeep Ghosh, Yong Jae Lee, and Kristen Grauman. 2012. Discovering important
people and objects for egocentric video summarization. In 2012 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE, 1346–1353.

[12] Boqing Gong, Wei-Lun Chao, Kristen Grauman, and Fei Sha. 2014. Di-
verse Sequential Subset Selection for Supervised Video Summarization.
In Advances
Information Processing Systems 27, Z. Ghahra-
mani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N.D. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger
(Eds.). Curran Associates,
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
5413-diverse-sequential-subset-selection-for-supervised-video-summarization.
pdf

Inc., 2069–2077.

in Neural

[13] Michael Gygli, Helmut Grabner, Hayko Riemenschneider, and Luc Van Gool.
2014. Creating summaries from user videos. In European conference on computer
vision. Springer, 505–520.

[14] Steve Hodges, Lyndsay Williams, Emma Berry, Shahram Izadi, James Srinivasan,
Alex Butler, Gavin Smyth, Narinder Kapur, and Ken Wood. 2006. SenseCam: A
Retrospective Memory Aid. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp’06). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 177–
193. https://doi.org/10.1007/11853565_11

[15] Judy Hoffman, Sergio Guadarrama, Eric Tzeng, Jeff Donahue, Ross B. Girshick,
Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. 2014. LSDA: Large Scale Detection Through
Adaptation. CoRR abs/1407.5035 (2014). http://arxiv.org/abs/1407.5035

[16] Bogdan Ionescu, Adrian Popescu, Mihai Lupu, Alexandru L Gınsca, and Henning
Müller. 2014. Retrieving diverse social images at mediaeval 2014: Challenge,
dataset and evaluation. In MediaEval 2014 Workshop, Barcelona, Spain.

[17] Yangqing Jia, Evan Shelhamer, Jeff Donahue, Sergey Karayev, Jonathan Long,
Ross Girshick, Sergio Guadarrama, and Trevor Darrell. 2014. Caffe: Convolutional
architecture for fast feature embedding. In Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Multimedia. ACM, 675–678.

[18] Amornched Jinda-Apiraksa, Jana Machajdik, and Robert Sablatnig. 2012. A
keyframe selection of lifelog image sequences. Erasmus Mundus M. Sc. in Visions
and Robotics thesis, Vienna University of Technology (TU Wien) (2012).

[19] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. 2012. Imagenet classifica-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems. 1097–1105.

[20] Alex Kulesza and Ben Taskar. 2012. Determinantal point processes for machine

learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.6083 (2012).

[21] Matthew L. Lee and Anind K. Dey. 2008. Lifelogging Memory Appliance for
People with Episodic Memory Impairment. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
44–53. https://doi.org/10.1145/1409635.1409643

[22] Zheng Lu and Kristen Grauman. 2013. Story-driven summarization for egocentric
video. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2013 IEEE Conference
on. IEEE, 2714–2721.

[23] S. Mann. 1998. ’WearCam’ (The wearable camera): personal imaging systems for
long-term use in wearable tetherless computer-mediated reality and personal
photo/videographic memory prosthesis. In Wearable Computers, 1998. Digest of
Papers. Second International Symposium on. 124–131. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ISWC.1998.729538

[24] W. W. Mayol, B. J. Tordoff, and D. W. Murray. 2002. Wearable Visual Robots.
Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 6, 1 (Jan. 2002), 37–48. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s007790200004

[25] Mark Montague and Javed A Aslam. 2001. Relevance score normalization for
metasearch. In Proceedings of the tenth international conference on Information
and knowledge management. ACM, 427–433.

[26] Junting Pan, Kevin McGuinness, and Xavier Giró-i Nieto. 2016. End-to-end

Convolutional Network for Saliency Prediction. In Submitted to CVPR.

[27] P. Piasek, K. Irving, and A.F. Smeaton. 2011. SenseCam intervention based on
Cognitive Stimulation Therapy framework for early-stage dementia. In Pervasive
Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2011 5th International
Conference on. 522–525.

[28] Paulina Piasek, Alan F Smeaton, et al. 2014. Using lifelogging to help construct

the identity of people with dementia. (2014).

[29] Sachan Priyamvada Rajendra and N Keshaveni. 2014. A survey of automatic
video summarization techniques. International Journal of Electronics, Electrical
and Computational System 2 (2014).

[30] M Elena Renda and Umberto Straccia. 2003. Web metasearch: rank vs. score
based rank aggregation methods. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM symposium on
Applied computing. ACM, 841–846.

[31] Abigail J. Sellen, Andrew Fogg, Mike Aitken, Steve Hodges, Carsten Rother, and
Ken Wood. 2007. Do Life-logging Technologies Support Memory for the Past?:
An Experimental Study Using Sensecam. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’07). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
81–90. https://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240636

[32] Kai Song, Yonghong Tian, Wen Gao, and Tiejun Huang. 2006. Diversifying the
Image Retrieval Results. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual ACM International
Conference on Multimedia (MULTIMEDIA ’06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 707–710.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1180639.1180789

[33] Aimee Spector, Lene Thorgrimsen, Bob Woods, Lindsay Royan, Steve Davies,
Margaret Butterworth (deceased), and Martin Orrell. 2003. Efficacy of an evidence-
based cognitive stimulation therapy programme for people with dementia. The
British Journal of Psychiatry 183, 3 (2003), 248–254. https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.
183.3.248

[34] Eleftherios Spyromitros-Xioufis, Symeon Papadopoulos, Yiannis Kompatsiaris,
and Ioannis Vlahavas. 2014. SocialSensor: Finding Diverse Images at MediaEval
2014. (2014).

[35] Robert C Streijl, Stefan Winkler, and David S Hands. 2016. Mean opinion score
(MOS) revisited: methods and applications, limitations and alternatives. Multi-
media Systems 22, 2 (2016), 213–227.

[36] Estefania Talavera, Mariella Dimiccoli, Marc Bolaños, Maedeh Aghaei, and Petia
Radeva. 2015. R-clustering for egocentric video segmentation. In Pattern Recog-
nition and Image Analysis. Springer, 327–336.

[37] Reinier H. van Leuken, Lluis Garcia, Ximena Olivares, and Roelof van Zwol.
2009. Visual Diversification of Image Search Results. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW ’09). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 341–350. https://doi.org/10.1145/1526709.1526756

[38] Cheng Xiang Zhai, William W Cohen, and John Lafferty. 2003. Beyond inde-
pendent relevance: methods and evaluation metrics for subtopic retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 26th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research
and development in informaion retrieval. ACM, 10–17.

[39] Xiangxin Zhu and Deva Ramanan. 2012. Face detection, pose estimation, and
landmark localization in the wild. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2012 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 2879–2886.

