Photorealistic Facial Texture Inference Using Deep Neural Networks

Shunsuke Saito*†§

Lingyu Wei*†§

Liwen Hu*†

Koki Nagano‡

Hao Li*†‡

*Pinscreen

†University of Southern California

‡USC Institute for Creative Technologies

6
1
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
5
0
0
.
2
1
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: We present an inference framework based on deep neural networks for synthesizing photorealistic facial texture
along with 3D geometry from a single unconstrained image. We can successfully digitize historic ﬁgures that are no longer
available for scanning and produce high-ﬁdelity facial texture maps with mesoscopic skin details.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present a data-driven inference method that can syn-
thesize a photorealistic texture map of a complete 3D face
model given a partial 2D view of a person in the wild. After
an initial estimation of shape and low-frequency albedo, we
compute a high-frequency partial texture map, without the
shading component, of the visible face area. To extract the
ﬁne appearance details from this incomplete input, we intro-
duce a multi-scale detail analysis technique based on mid-
layer feature correlations extracted from a deep convolu-
tional neural network. We demonstrate that ﬁtting a convex
combination of feature correlations from a high-resolution
face database can yield a semantically plausible facial de-
tail description of the entire face. A complete and photo-
realistic texture map can then be synthesized by iteratively
optimizing for the reconstructed feature correlations. Using
these high-resolution textures and a commercial rendering
framework, we can produce high-ﬁdelity 3D renderings that
are visually comparable to those obtained with state-of-the-
art multi-view face capture systems. We demonstrate suc-
cessful face reconstructions from a wide range of low reso-
lution input images, including those of historical ﬁgures. In
addition to extensive evaluations, we validate the realism of
our results using a crowdsourced user study.

§- indicates equal contribution

1

Until recently, the digitization of photorealistic faces
has only been possible in professional studio settings, typ-
ically involving sophisticated appearance measurement de-
vices [55, 34, 20, 4, 19] and carefully controlled lighting
conditions. While such a complex acquisition process is ac-
ceptable for production purposes, the ability to build high-
end 3D face models from a single unconstrained image
could widely impact new forms of immersive communica-
tion, education, and consumer applications. With virtual
and augmented reality becoming the next generation plat-
form for social interaction, compelling 3D avatars could
be generated with minimal efforts and pupeteered through
facial performances [31, 39]. Within the context of cul-
tural heritage, iconic and historical personalities could be
restored to life in captivating 3D digital forms from archival
photographs. For example: can we use Computer Vision to
bring back our favorite boxing legend, Muhammad Ali, and
relive his greatest moments in 3D?

Capturing accurate and complete facial appearance prop-
erties from images in the wild is a fundamentally ill-posed
problem. Often the input pictures have limited resolu-
tion, only a partial view of the subject is available, and
the lighting conditions are unknown. Most state-of-the-art
monocular facial capture frameworks [52, 45] rely on lin-
ear PCA models [6] and important appearance details for
photorealistic rendering such as complex skin pigmenta-
tion variations and mesoscopic-level texture details (freck-
les, pores, stubble hair, etc.), cannot be modeled. Despite

Figure 2: Overview of our texture inference framework. After an initial low-frequency (LF) albedo map estimation, we
extract partial high-frequency (HF) components from the visible areas using texture analysis. Mid-layer feature correlations
are then reconstructed to produce a complete high-frequency albedo map via texture synthesis.

recent efforts in hallucinating details using data-driven tech-
niques [32, 37] and deep learning inference [13], it is still
not possible to reconstruct high-resolution textures while
preserving the likeness of the original subject and ensuring
photorealism.

From a single unconstrained image (potentially low reso-
lution), our goal is to infer a high-ﬁdelity textured 3D model
which can be rendered in any virtual environment. The
high-resolution albedo texture map should match the resem-
blance of the subject while reproducing mesoscopic facial
details. Without capturing advanced appearance proper-
ties (bump maps, specularity maps, BRDFs, etc.), we want
to show that photorealistic renderings are possible using a
reasonable shape estimation, a production-level rendering
framework [49], and, most crucially, a high-ﬁdelity albedo
texture. The core challenge consists of developing a facial
texture inference framework that can capture the immense
appearance variations of faces and synthesize realistic high-
resolution details, while maintaining ﬁdelity to the target.

Inspired by the latest advancement in neural synthesis
algorithms for style transfer [18, 17], we adopt a factor-
ized representation of low-frequency and high-frequency
albedo as illustrated in Figure 2. While the low-frequency
map is simply represented by a linear PCA model (Sec-
tion 3), we characterize high-frequency texture details for
mesoscopic structures as mid-layer feature correlations of a
deep convolutional neural network for general image recog-
nition [48]. Partial feature correlations are ﬁrst analyzed
on an incomplete texture map extracted from the uncon-
strained input image. We then infer complete feature corre-
lations using a convex combination of feature correlations
obtained from a large database of high-resolution face tex-
tures [33] (Section 4). A high-resolution albedo texture map
can then be synthesized by iteratively optimizing an initial
low-frequency albedo texture to match these feature corre-
lations via back-propagation and quasi-Newton optimiza-
tion (Section 5). Our high-frequency detail representation
with feature correlations captures high-level facial appear-
ance information at multiple scales, and ensures plausible
mesoscopic-level structures in their corresponding regions.
The blending technique with convex combinations in fea-
ture correlation space not only handles the large variation

and non-linearity of facial appearances, but also generates
high-resolution texture maps, which is not possible with
existing end-to-end deep learning frameworks [13]. Fur-
thermore, our method uses the publicly available and pre-
trained deep convolutional neural network, VGG-19 [48],
and requires no further training. We make the following
contributions:

• We introduce an inference method that can gener-
ate high-resolution albedo texture maps with plausible
mesoscopic details from a single unconstrained image.

• We show that semantically plausible ﬁne-scale details
can be synthesized by blending high-resolution tex-
tures using convex combinations of feature correla-
tions obtained from mid-layer deep neural net ﬁlters.

• We demonstrate using a crowdsourced user study that
our photorealistic results are visually comparable to
ground truth measurements from a cutting-edge Light
Stage capture device [19, 51].

• We introduce a new dataset of 3D face models with
high-ﬁdelity texture maps based on high-resolution
photographs of the Chicago Face Database [33], which
will be publicly available to the research community.

2. Related Work

Facial Appearance Capture. Specialized hardware for
facial capture, such as the Light Stage, has been introduced
by Debevec et al. [10] and improved over the years [34, 19,
20], with full sphere LEDs and multiple cameras to mea-
sure an accurate reﬂectance ﬁeld. Though restricted to stu-
dio environments, production-level relighting and appear-
ance measurements (bump maps, specular maps, subsurface
scattering etc.) are possible. Weyrich et al. [55] adopted a
similar system to develop a photorealistic skin reﬂectance
model for statistical appearance analysis and meso-scale
texture synthesis. A contact-based apparatus for path-based
microstructure scale measurement using silicone mold ma-
terial has been proposed by Haro et al. [23]. Optical acqui-
sition methods have also been suggested to produce full-
facial microstructure details [22] and skin microstructure

2

deformations [38]. As an effort to make facial digitization
more deployable, monocular systems [50, 24, 9, 47, 52] that
record multiple views have recently been introduced to gen-
erate seamlessly integrated texture maps for virtual avatars.
When only a single input image is available, Kemelmacher-
Shlizerman and Basri [27] proposed a shape-from-shading
framework that produces an albedo map using a Lamber-
tian reﬂectance model. Barron and Malik [3] introduced a
statistical approach to estimate shape, illumination, and re-
ﬂectance from arbitrary objects. Li et al. [29] later presented
an intrinsic image decomposition technique to separate dif-
fuse and specular components for faces. For all these meth-
ods, only textures from the visible regions can be computed
and the resolution is limited by the input.

Linear Face Models. Turk and Pentland [53] introduced
the concept of Eigenfaces for face recognition and were
one of the ﬁrst to represent facial appearances as linear
In the context of facial tracking, Edwards et
models.
al. [14] developed the widely used active appearance mod-
els (AAM) based on linear combinations of shape and
appearance, which has resulted in several important sub-
sequent works [1, 12, 36]. The seminal work on mor-
phable face models of Blanz and Vetter [6] has put for-
ward an analysis-by-synthesis framework for textured 3D
face modeling and lighting estimation. Since their Princi-
pal Component Analysis (PCA)-based face model is built
from a database of 3D face scans, a complete albedo tex-
ture map can be estimated robustly from a single image.
Several extensions have been proposed leveraging internet
images [26] and large-scale 3D facial scans [7]. PCA-based
models are fundamentally limited by their linear assump-
tion and fail to capture mesoscopic details as well as large
variations in facial appearances (e.g., hair texture).

synthesis

Texture Synthesis. Non-parametric
algo-
rithms [16, 54, 15, 28] have been developed to synthesize
repeating structures using samples from small patches,
while ensuring local consistency. These general techniques
only work for stochastic textures such as micro-scale
skin structures [23], but are not directly applicable to
mesoscopic face details due to the lack of high-level visual
cues about facial conﬁgurations. The super resolution
technique of Liu et al. [32] hallucinates high-frequency
content using a local path-based Markov network, but the
results remain relatively blurry and cannot predict missing
regions. Mohammed et al. [37] introduced a statistical
framework for generating novel faces based on randomized
patches. While the generated faces look realistic, noisy
artifacts appear for high-resolution images. Facial detail
enhancement techniques based on statistical models [21]
have been introduced to synthesize pores and wrinkles, but
have only been demonstrated in the geometric domain.

Deep Learning Inference. Leveraging the vast learning
capacity of deep neural networks and their ability to capture
higher level representations, Duong et al. [13] introduced an

inference framework based on Deep Boltzmann Machines
that can handle the large variation and non-linearity of fa-
cial appearances effectively. A different approach consists
of predicting non-visible regions based on context infor-
mation. Pathak et al. [40] adopted an encoder-decoder ar-
chitecture trained with a Generative Adverserial Network
(GAN) for general in-painting tasks. However, due to
fundamental limitations of existing end-to-end deep neu-
ral networks, only images with very small resolutions can
be processed. Gatys et al. [18, 17] recently proposed a
style-transfer technique using deep neural networks that has
the ability to seamlessly blend the content from one high-
resolution image with the style of another while preserving
consistent structures of low and high-level visual features.
They describe style as mid-layer feature correlations of a
convolutional neural network. We show in this work that
these feature correlations are particularly effective in repre-
senting high-frequency multi-scale appearance components
including mesoscopic facial details.

3. Initial Face Model Fitting

We begin with an initial joint estimation of facial shape
and low frequency albedo, and produce a complete texture
map using a PCA-based morphable face model [6] (Fig-
ure 2). Given an unconstrained single input image, we com-
pute a face shape V , an albedo map I, the rigid head pose
(R, t), and the perspective transformation ΠP (V ) with the
camera parameters P . A partial high-frequency albedo map
is then extracted from the visible area and represented in the
UV space of the shape model. This partial high-frequency
map is later used to extract feature correlations in the texture
analysis stage (Section 4) and the complete low-frequency
albedo map used as initialization for the texture synthesis
step (Section 5). Our initial PCA model ﬁtting framework
is built upon the previous work [52]. Here we brieﬂy de-
scribe the main ideas and highlight key differences.

PCA Model Fitting. The low-frequency facial albedo I
and the shape V are represented as a multi-linear PCA
model with n = 53k vertices and 106k faces:

V (αid, αexp) = ¯V + Aidαid + Aexpαexp,

I(αal) = ¯I + Aalαal,

where the identity, expression, and albedo are represented
as a multivariate normal distribution with the correspond-
ing basis: Aid ∈ R3n×80, Aexp ∈ R3n×29, and Aal ∈
R3n×80, the mean: ¯V = ¯Vid + ¯Vexp ∈ R3n, and ¯I ∈ R3n,
and the corresponding standard deviation: σid ∈ R80,
σexp ∈ R29, and σal ∈ R80. We assume Lambertian sur-
face reﬂectance and model the illumination using a second
order Spherical Harmonics (SH) [42], denoting the illumi-
nation L ∈ R27. We use the Basel Face Model dataset [41]
for Aid, Aal, ¯V , and ¯I, and FaceWarehouse [8] for Aexp
provided by [56]. Following the implementation in [52] we
compute all the unknowns χ = {V, I, R, t, P, L} with the

3

following objective function:

E(χ) = wcEc(χ) + wlanElan(χ) + wregEreg(χ),

(1)

with energy term weights wc = 1, wlan = 10, and wreg =
2.5 × 10−5. The photo-consistency term Ec minimizes the
distance between the synthetic face and the input image, the
landmark term Elan minimizes the distance between the fa-
cial features of the shape and the detected landmarks, and
the regularization term penalizes the deviation of the face
from the normal distribution. We augment the term Ec
in [52] with a visibility component:

Ec(χ) =

(cid:107)Cinput(p) − Csynth(p)(cid:107)2,

1
|M|

(cid:88)

p∈M

where Cinput is the input image, Csynth the synthesized
image, and p ∈ M a visibility pixel computed from a se-
mantical facial segmentation estimated using a two-stream
deconvolution network introduced by Saito et al. [46]. The
segmentation mask ensures that the objective function is
computed with valid face pixels for improved robustness in
the presence of occlusion. The landmark ﬁtting term Elan
and the regularization term Ereg are deﬁned as:

Elan(χ) =

(cid:107)fi − ΠP (RVi + t)(cid:107)2
2,

1
|F|

(cid:88)

fi∈F

Ereg(χ) =

80
(cid:88)

(cid:20)
(

i=1

αid,i
σid,i

)2 + (

αal,i
σal,i

(cid:21)

)2

+

29
(cid:88)

i=1

(

αexp,i
σexp,i

)2.

where fi ∈ F is a 2D facial feature obtained from the
method of Kazemi et al. [25]. The objective function is op-
timized using a Gauss-Newton solver based on iteratively
reweighted least squares with three levels of image pyra-
mids (see [52] for details).
In our experiments, the op-
timization converges within 30, 10, and 3 Gauss-Newton
steps respectively from the coarsest level to the ﬁnest.

Partial High-Frequency Albedo. While our PCA-based
albedo estimation provides a complete texture map, it only
captures low frequencies. To enable the analysis of ﬁne-
scale skin details from the single-view image, we need to
extract a partial high-frequency albedo map from the in-
put. We factor out the shading component from the input
RGB image by estimating the illumination L, the surface
normal N , and an optimized partial face geometry V using
the method presented in [6, 44]. To extract the partial high-
frequency albedo map from the visible face regions we use
an automatic facial segmentation technique [46].

4. Texture Analysis

As shown in Figure 3, we wish to extract multi-scale de-
tails from the resulting high-frequency partial albedo map
obtained in Section 3. These ﬁne-scale details are repre-
sented by mid-layer feature correlations from a deep convo-
lutional neural network as explained in this Section. We ﬁrst

Figure 3: Texture analysis. The hollow arrows indicate a
processing through a deep convolutional neural network.

Figure 4: Convex combination of feature correlations. The
numbers indicate the number of subjects used for blending
correlation matrices.

extract partial feature correlations from the partially visible
albedo map, then estimate coefﬁcients of a convex combina-
tion of partial feature correlations from a face database with
high-resolution texture maps. We use these coefﬁcients to
evaluate feature correlations that correspond to convex com-
binations of full high-frequency texture maps. These com-
plete feature correlations represent the target detail distribu-
tion for the texture synthesis step in Section 5. Notice that
all processing is applied on the intensity Y using the YIQ
color space to preserve the overall color as in [17].

For an input image I, let F l(I) be the ﬁlter response
of I on layer l. We have F l(I) ∈ RNl×Ml where Nl is
the number of channels/ﬁlters and Ml is the number of pix-
els (width×height) of the feature map. The correlation of
the local structures can be represented as the normalized
Gramian matrix Gl(I):

Gl(I) =

F l(I) (cid:0)F l(I)(cid:1)T

∈ RNl×Nl

1
Ml

We show that for a face texture, its feature response from
the latter layers and the correlation matrices from former
ones sufﬁciently characterize the facial details to ensure
photo-realism and perceptually identical images. A com-
plete and photorealistic face texture can then be inferred
from this information using the partially visible face in im-
age I0.

As only the low-frequency appearance is encoded in the
last few layers, exploiting feature response from the com-
plete low-frequency albedo I(αal) optimized in Sec. 3 gives
us an estimation of the desired feature response ˆF for I0:
ˆF l(I0) = F l(I(αal)).

The remaining problem is to extract such a feature correla-
tion (for the complete face) from a partially visible face as
illustrated in Figure 3.

4

Figure 5: Using convex constraints, we can ensure detail
preservation for low-quality and noisy input data.

Feature Correlation Extraction. A key observation is
that the correlation matrices obtained from images of dif-
ferent faces can be linearly blended, and the combined ma-
trices still produce realistic results. See Figure 4 as an ex-
ample for matrices blended from 4 images to 256 images.
Hence, we conjecture that the desired correlation matrix
can be linearly combined from such matrices using a suf-
ﬁciently large database.

However, the input image, denoted as I0, often contains
only a partially visible face, so we can only obtain the cor-
relation in a partial region. To eliminate the change of cor-
relation due to different visibility, complete textures in the
database are masked out and their correlation matrices are
recomputed to simulate the same visibility as the input. We
deﬁne a mask-out function M(I) to remove all non-visible
pixels:

M(I)p =

(cid:40)

0.5,
Ip,

if p is non-visible
otherwise

where p is an arbitrary pixel. We choose 0.5 as a constant in-
tensity for non-visible regions. So the new correlation ma-
trix of layer l for each image in dataset {I1, . . . , IK} is:

Gl

M(Ik) = Gl(M(Ik)), ∀k ∈ {1, . . . , K}

Multi-Scale Detail Reconstruction. Given the correla-
tion matrices {Gl
M(Ik), k = 1, . . . , K} derived from our
database, we can ﬁnd an optimal blending weight to linearly
combine them to minimize its difference from Gl
M(I0) ob-
served from the input I0:

(cid:13)
(cid:80)
(cid:13)(cid:80)
k wkGl
min
l
w
s.t. (cid:80)K
k=1 wk = 1

M(Ik) − Gl

M(I0)(cid:13)
(cid:13)F

wk ≥ 0 ∀k ∈ {1, . . . , K}

(2)

After obtaining the blending weights, we can simply

compute the correlation matrix for the whole image:

ˆGl(I0) =

wkGl(Ik), ∀l

(cid:88)

k

Figure 6: Detail weight for texture synthesis.

5. Texture Synthesis

After obtaining our estimated feature ˆF and correlation
ˆG from I0, the ﬁnal step is to synthesize a complete albedo
I matching both aspects. More speciﬁcally, we select a set
of high-frequency preserving layers LG and low-frequency
preserving layers LF and try to match ˆGl(I0) and ˆF l(I0)
for layers in these sets, respectively.

The desired albedo is computed via the following opti-

mization:

min
I

(cid:88)

l∈LF

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
2
(cid:13)F l(I) − ˆF l(I0)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

F

(cid:88)

+ α

l∈LG

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
2
(cid:13)Gl(I) − ˆGl(I0)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

F

(3)
where α is a weight balancing the effect of high and low-
frequency details. As illustrated in Figure 6, we choose α =
2000 for all our experiments to preserve the details.

While this is a non-convex optimization problem, the
gradient of this function can be easily computed. Gl(I) can
be considered as an extra layer in the neural network after
layer l, and the optimization above is similar to the process
of training a neural network with Frobenius norm as its loss
function. Note that here our goal is to modify the input I
rather than solving for the network parameters.

For the Frobenius loss function L(X) = (cid:107)X − A(cid:107)2
F ,
where A is a constant matrix, and for Gramian matrix
G(X) = XX T /n, their gradients can be computed ana-
lytically as follows:

∂L
∂X

= 2(X − A)

∂G
∂X

=

X

2
n

Here, the Frobenius norms of correlation matrix differences
on different layers are accumulated. Note that we add extra
constraints to the blending weight so that the blended cor-
relation matrix is located within the convex hull of matrices
derived from the database. While a simple least squares op-
timization without constraints can ﬁnd a good ﬁtting for the
observed correlation matrix, artifacts could occur if the ob-
served region in the input data is of poor quality. Enforcing
convexity can reduce such artifacts, as shown in Figure 5.

As the derivative of every high-frequency Ld and low-
frequency layer Lc can be computed, we can apply the chain
rule on this multi-layer neural network to back-propagate
the gradient on preceding layers all the way to the ﬁrst one,
to get the gradient of input ∇I. Given the size of variables
in this optimization problem and the limitation of the GPU
memory, we follow Gatys et al.’s choice [18] of using an
L-BFGS solver to optimize I. We use the low frequency
albedo I(αal) from Section 3 to initialize the problem.

5

6. Results

We processed a wide variety of input images with sub-
jects of different races, ages, and gender, including celebri-
ties and people from the publicly available annotated faces-
in-the-wild (AFW), dataset [43]. We cover challenging ex-
amples of scenes with complex illumination as well as non-
frontal faces. As showcased in Figures 1 and 20, our infer-
ence technique produces high-resolution texture maps with
complex skin tones and mesoscopic-scale details (pores,
stubble hair), even from very low-resolution input images.
Consequentially, we are able to effortlessly produce high-
ﬁdelity digitizations of iconic personalities who have passed
away, such as Muhammad Ali, or bring back their younger
selves (e.g., young Hillary Clinton) from a single archival
photograph. Until recently, such results would only be pos-
sible with high-end capture devices [55, 34, 20, 19] or in-
tensive effort from digital artists. We also show photoreal-
istic renderings of our reconstructed face models from the
widely used AFW database, which reveal high-frequency
pore structures, skin moles, as well as short facial hair. We
clearly observe that low-frequency albedo maps obtained
from a linear PCA model [6] are unable to capture these de-
tails. Figure 7 illustrates the estimated shape and also com-
pares the renderings between the low-frequency albedo and
our ﬁnal results. For the renderings, we use Arnold [49], a
Monte Carlo ray-tracer, with generic subsurface scattering,
image-based lighting, procedural roughness and specular-
ity, and a bump map derived from the synthesized texture.

Evaluation. We evaluate the performance of our texture
synthesis with three widely used convolutional neural net-
works (CaffeNet, VGG-16, and VGG-19) [5, 48] for image
recognition. While different models can be used, deeper ar-
chitectures tend to produce less artifacts and higher quality
textures. To validate our use of all 5 mid-layers of VGG-19
for the multi-scale representation of details, we show that if
less layers are used, the synthesized textures would become
blurrier, as shown in Figure 8. While the texture synthe-
sis formulation in Equation 3 suggests a blend between the
low-frequency albedo and the multi-scale facial details, we
expect to maximize the amount of detail and only use the
low-frequency PCA model estimation for initialization.

Figure 8: Different numbers of mid-layers affects the level
of detail of our inference.

As depicted in Figure 9, we also demonstrate that our
method is able to produce consistent high-ﬁdelity texture
maps of a subject captured from different views. Even for
extreme proﬁles, highly detailed freckles are synthesized
properly in the reconstructed textures. Please refer to our
additional materials for more evaluations.

Figure 7: Photorealistic renderings of geometry, texture ob-
tained using PCA model ﬁtting, and our method.

Face Texture Database. For our texture analysis method
(Section 4) and to evaluate our approach, we built a large
database of high-quality facial skin textures from the re-
cently released Chicago Face Database [33] used for psy-
chological studies. The data collection contains a balanced
set of standardized high-resolution photographs of 592 in-
dividuals of different ethnicity, ages, and gender. While the
images were taken in a consistent environment, the shape
and lighting conditions need to be estimated in order to re-
cover a diffuse albedo map for each subject. We extend the
method described in Section 3 to ﬁt a PCA face model to all
the subjects while solving for globally consistent lighting.
Before we apply inverse illumination, we remove specular-
ities in SUV color space [35] by ﬁltering the specular peak
in the S channel since the faces were shot with ﬂash.

Figure 9: Consistent and plausible reconstructions from two
different viewpoints.

facial

image generation technique,

Comparison. We compare our method with the state-
visio-
of-the-art
lization [37] and the widely used morphable face models
of Blanz and Vetter [6] in Figure 11. Both ours and visio-
lization produce higher ﬁdelity texture maps than a linear
PCA model solution [6]. When increasing the resolution,
we can clearly see that our inference approach outperforms
the statistical framework of Mohammed et al. [37] with
mesoscopic-scale features such as pores and stubble hair,
while their method suffers from random noise patterns.

Performance. All our experiments are performed using
an Intel Core i7-5930K CPU with 3.5 GHz equipped with

6

Figure 10: Our method successfully reconstructs high-quality textured face models on a wide variety of people from chal-
lenging unconstrained images. We compare the estimated low-frequency albedo map based on PCA model ﬁtting (second
column) and our synthesized high-frequency albedo map (third column). Photorealistic renderings in novel lighting envi-
ronments are produced using the commercial Arnold renderer [49] and only the estimated shape and synthesized texture
map.

7

which indicates that non-technical turkers have a hard time
distinguishing between them.

Figure 13: Side-by-side renderings of 3D faces for AMT.

User Study B: Our method vs. Light Stage Capture.
We also compare the photo-realism of renderings produced
using our method with the ones from Light Stage [19]. We
use an interface on AMT that allows turkers to rank the ren-
derings from realistic to unrealistic. We show side-by-side
renderings of 3D face models as shown in Figure 13 us-
ing (1) our synthesized textures, (2) the ones from the Light
Stage, and (3) one obtained using PCA model ﬁtting [6].
We asked 100 turkers to each sort 3 sets of pre-rendered im-
ages, which are randomly shufﬂed. We used three subjects
and perturbed their head rotations to produce more samples.
We found that our synthetically generated details can con-
fuse the turkers for subjects that have smoother skins, which
resulted in 56% thinking that results from (1) are more re-
alistic from (2). Also, 74% of the turkers found that faces
from (2) are more realistic than from (3) and 72% think that
method (1) is superior to (3). Our experiments indicate that
our results are visually comparable to those from the Light
Stage and that the level of photorealism is challenging to
judge by a non-technical audience.

7. Discussion

We have shown that digitizing high-ﬁdelity albedo tex-
ture maps is possible from a single unconstrained image.
Despite challenging illumination conditions, non-frontal
faces, and low-resolution input, we can synthesize plausi-
ble appearances and realistic mesoscopic details. Our user
study indicates that the resulting high-resolution textures
can yield photorealistic renderings that are visually compa-
rable to those obtained using a state-of-the-art Light Stage
system. Mid-layer feature correlations are highly effective
in capturing high-frequency details and the general appear-
ance of the person. Our proposed neural synthesis approach
can handle high-resolution textures, which is not possible
with existing deep learning frameworks [13]. We also found
that convex combinations are crucial when blending feature
correlations in order to ensure consistent ﬁne-scale details.

Limitations. Our multi-scale detail representation cur-
rently does not allow us to control the exact appearance of
high-frequency details after synthesis. For instance, a mole
could be generated in an arbitrary place even if it does not

Figure 11: Comparison of our method with PCA-based
model ﬁtting [6], visio-lization [37], and the ground truth.

Figure 12: Box plots of 150 turkers rating whether the
image looks realistic and identical to the ground truth.
Each plot contains the positive rates for 11 subjects in the
Chicago Face Database.

a GeForce GTX Titan X with 12 GB memory. Following
the pipeline in Figure 2 and 3, our initial face model ﬁt-
ting takes less than a second, the texture analysis consists
of 75 s of partial feature correlation extraction and 14 s of
ﬁtting with convex combination, and the the ﬁnal synthesis
optimization takes 172 s for 1000 iterations.

User Study A: Photorealism and Alikeness. To assess
the photorealism and the likeness of our reconstructed
faces, we propose a crowdsourced experiment using Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk (AMT). We compare ground truth
photographs from the Chicago Face Database with ren-
derings of textures that are generated with different tech-
niques. These synthesized textures are then composited on
the original images using the estimated lighting and shad-
ing parameters. We randomly select 11 images from the
database and blur them using Gaussian ﬁltering until the
details are gone. We then synthesize high-frequency tex-
tures from these blurred images using (1) a PCA model, (2)
visio-lization, (3) our method using the closest feature cor-
relation, (4) our method using unconstrained linear combi-
nations, and (5) our method using convex combinations. We
show the turkers a left and right side of a face and inform
them that the left side is always the ground truth. The right
side has a 50% chance of being computer generated. The
task consists of deciding whether the right side is “real” and
identical to the ground truth, or “fake”. We summarize our
analysis with the box plot in Figure 12 using 150 turkers.
Overall, (5) outperforms all other solutions and different
variations of our method have similar means and medians,

8

actually exist. The ﬁnal optimization step of our synthesis is
non-convex, which requires a good initialization. As shown
in Figure 7, the PCA-based albedo estimation can fail to es-
timate the goatee of the subject, resulting in a synthesized
texture without facial hair.

Future Work. To extend our automatic characterization
of high-frequency details, we wish to develop new ways for
specifying the appearance of mesoscopic distributions us-
ing high-level controls. Next, we would like to explore the
generation of ﬁne-scale geometry, such as wrinkles, using a
similar texture inference approach.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Jaewoo Seo and Matt Furniss
for the renderings. We also thank Joseph J. Lim, Kyle Ol-
szewski, Zimo Li, and Ronald Yu for the fruitful discus-
sions and the proofreading. This research is supported in
part by Adobe, Oculus & Facebook, Huawei, the Google
Faculty Research Award, the Okawa Foundation Research
Grant, the Ofﬁce of Naval Research (ONR) / U.S. Navy,
under award number N00014-15-1-2639, the Ofﬁce of the
Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) and Intelligence
Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), under con-
tract number 2014-14071600010, and the U.S. Army Re-
search Laboratory (ARL) under contract W911NF-14-D-
0005. The views and conclusions contained herein are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessar-
ily representing the ofﬁcial policies or endorsements, ei-
ther expressed or implied, of ODNI, IARPA, ARL, or the
U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to
reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purpose
notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon.

Appendix I. Additional Results

Our main results in the paper demonstrate successful in-
ference of high-ﬁdelity texture maps from unconstrained
images. The input images have mostly low resolutions, non-
frontal faces, and the subjects are often captured in chal-
lenging lighting conditions. We provide additional results
with pictures from the annotated faces-in-the-wild (AFW)
dataset [43] to further demonstrate how photorealistic pore-
level details can be synthesized using our deep learning ap-
proach. We visualize in Figure 20 the input, the intermedi-
ate low-frequency albedo map obtained using a linear PCA
model, and the synthesized high-frequency albedo texture
map. We also show several views of the ﬁnal renderings us-
ing the Arnold renderer [49]. We refer to the accompanying
video for additional rotating views of the resulting textured
3D face models.

Evaluation. As Figure 14 indicates, other deep convolu-
tional neural networks can be used to extract mid-layer fea-
ture correlations to characterize multi-scale details, but it

§- indicates equal contribution

Figure 14: Comparison between different convolutional
neural network architectures.

Figure 15: Even for largely downsized image resolutions,
our algorithm can produce ﬁne-scale details while preserv-
ing the person’s similarity.

seems that deeper architectures produce fewer artifacts and
higher quality textures. All three convolutional neural net-
works are pre-trained for classiﬁcation tasks using images
from the ImageNet object recognition dataset [11]. The re-
sults of the 8 layer CaffeNet [5] show noticeable blocky ar-
tifacts in the synthesized textures and the ones from the 16
layer VGG [48] are slightly noisy around boundaries, while
the 19 layer VGG network performs the best.

We also evaluate the robustness of our inference frame-
work for downsized image resolutions in Figure 15. We
crop a diffuse lit face from a Light Stage capture [19]. The
resulting image has 435 × 652 pixels and we decrease its
resolution to 108 × 162 pixels. In addition to complex skin
pigmentations, even the tiny mole on the lower left cheek is
properly reconstructed from the reduced input image using
our synthesis approach.

Comparison. We provide in Figure 16 additional visual-
izations of our method when using the closest feature corre-
lation, unconstrained linear combinations, and convex com-
binations. We also compare against a PCA-based model
ﬁtting [6] approach and the state-of-the-art visio-lization
framework [37]. We notice that only our proposed tech-
nique using convex combinations is effective in generat-
ing mesoscopic-scale texture details. Both visio-lization

9

Figure 17: Comparison with PatchMatch [2] on a partial
input data.

and the PCA-based model result in lower frequency tex-
tures and less similar faces than the ground truth. Since
our inference also ﬁlls holes, we compare our synthesis
technique with a general inpainting solution for predicting
unseen face regions. We test with the widely used Patch-
Match [2] technique as illustrated in Figure 17. Unsurpris-
ingly, we observe unwanted repeating structures and seman-
tically wrong ﬁllings since this method is based on low-level
vision cues.

Appendix II. User Study Details

This section gives further details and discussions about
the two user studies presented in the paper. Figures 18 and
19 also show the user interfaces that we deployed on Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk (AMT).

Figure 16: Comparison between PCA-based model ﬁt-
ting [6], visio-lization [37], our method using the closest
feature correlation, our method using unconstrained linear
combinations, and our method using convex combinations.

Figure 18: AMT user interface for user study A.

User Study A: Photorealism and Alikeness. We recall
that method (1) is obtained using PCA model ﬁtting, (2)
is visio-lization, (3) is our method using the closest feature
correlation, (4) our method using unconstrained linear com-
binations, and (5) our method using convex combinations.
We use photographs from the Chicago Face Database [33]
for this evaluation, and downsize/crop their resolution from
2444 × 1718 to 512 × 512 pixels. At the end we apply one
iteration of Gaussian ﬁltering of kernel size 5 to remove all
the facial details. Only 65.6% of the real images on the
right have been correctly marked as “real”. This is likely
due to the fact that the turkers know that only 50% are real,

10

which affects their conﬁdence in distinguishing real ones
from digital reconstructions. Results based on PCA model
ﬁttings have few occurrences of false positives, which indi-
cates that turkers can reliably identify them. The generated
faces using visio-lization also appear to be less realistic and
similar than those obtained using variations of our method.
For the variants of our method, (3), (4), and (5), we mea-
sure similar means and medians, which indicates that non-
technical turkers have a hard time distinguishing between
them. However, method (4) has a higher chance than vari-
ant (3) to be marked as “real”, and the convex combination
method (5) achieves the best results as they occasionally no-
tice artifacts in (4). Notice how the left and right sides of
the face are swapped in the AMT interface to prevent users
from comparing texture transitions.

Figure 19: AMT user interface for user study B.

User Study B: Our method vs. Light Stage Capture.
We used three subjects (due to limited availability) and ran-
domly perturbed their head rotations to produce more ren-
dering samples. To obtain a consistent geometry for the
Light Stage data, we warped our mesh to ﬁt their raw scans
using non-rigid registration [30]. All examples are rendered
using full-on diffuse lighting and our input image to the in-
ference framework has a resolution of 435 × 652 pixels. We
asked 100 turkers to sort 3 sets of renderings, one for each
of the three subjects. Surprisingly, we found that 56% think
that ours are superior in terms of realism than those obtained
from the Light Stage, 74% of the turkers found the results of
(2) to be more realistic than (3), and 72% think that ours is
superior to (3). We believe that over 20% of the turkers who
believe that (3) is better than the two other methods are out-
liers. After removing these outliers, we still have 57% who
believe that our results are more photoreal than those from
the Light Stage. We believe that our synthetically generated
ﬁne-scale details confuse the turkers for subjects that have
smoother skins in reality. Overall our experiments indicate
that the performance of our method is visually comparable
to ground truth data obtained from a high-end facial capture
device. For a non-technical audience, it is hard to tell which
of the two methods produces more photorealistic results.

11

References

[1] B. Amberg, A. Blake, and T. Vetter. On compositional image
alignment, with an application to active appearance models.
In IEEE CVPR, pages 1714–1721, 2009.

[2] C. Barnes, E. Shechtman, A. Finkelstein, and D. Goldman.
Patchmatch: a randomized correspondence algorithm for
structural image editing. ACM Transactions on Graphics-
TOG, 28(3):24, 2009.

[3] J. T. Barron and J. Malik. Shape, albedo, and illumination
from a single image of an unknown object. CVPR, 2012.
[4] T. Beeler, B. Bickel, P. Beardsley, B. Sumner, and M. Gross.
High-quality single-shot capture of facial geometry. ACM
Trans. on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), 29(3):40:1–40:9,
2010.

[5] Berkeley Vision and Learning Center. Caffenet, 2014.

https://github.com/BVLC/caffe/tree/
master/models/bvlc_reference_caffenet.
[6] V. Blanz and T. Vetter. A morphable model for the synthesis
of 3d faces. In Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on
Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 187–
194, 1999.

[7] J. Booth, A. Roussos, S. Zafeiriou, A. Ponniah, and D. Dun-
away. A 3d morphable model learnt from 10,000 faces. In
IEEE CVPR, 2016.

[8] C. Cao, Y. Weng, S. Zhou, Y. Tong, and K. Zhou. Faceware-
house: A 3d facial expression database for visual computing.
IEEE TVCG, 20(3):413–425, 2014.

[9] C. Cao, H. Wu, Y. Weng, T. Shao, and K. Zhou. Real-time
facial animation with image-based dynamic avatars. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 35(4):126, 2016.

[10] P. Debevec, T. Hawkins, C. Tchou, H.-P. Duiker, and
W. Sarokin. Acquiring the Reﬂectance Field of a Human
Face. In SIGGRAPH, 2000.

[11] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei.
ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In
CVPR09, 2009.

[12] R. Donner, M. Reiter, G. Langs, P. Peloschek, and
H. Bischof.
Fast active appearance model search using
canonical correlation analysis. IEEE TPAMI, 28(10):1690–
1694, 2006.

[13] C. N. Duong, K. Luu, K. G. Quach, and T. D. Bui. Beyond
principal components: Deep boltzmann machines for face
modeling. In IEEE CVPR, pages 4786–4794, 2015.

[14] G. J. Edwards, C. J. Taylor, and T. F. Cootes. Interpreting
face images using active appearance models. In Proceedings
of the 3rd. International Conference on Face and Gesture
Recognition, FG ’98, pages 300–. IEEE Computer Society,
1998.

[15] A. A. Efros and W. T. Freeman. Image quilting for texture
In Proceedings of the 28th Annual
synthesis and transfer.
Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Tech-
niques, SIGGRAPH ’01, pages 341–346. ACM, 2001.
[16] A. A. Efros and T. K. Leung. Texture synthesis by non-
parametric sampling. In IEEE ICCV, pages 1033–, 1999.
[17] L. A. Gatys, M. Bethge, A. Hertzmann, and E. Shecht-
man. Preserving color in neural artistic style transfer. CoRR,
abs/1606.05897, 2016.

Figure 20: Additional results with images from the annotated faces-in-the-wild (AFW) dataset [43].

[18] L. A. Gatys, A. S. Ecker, and M. Bethge. Image style transfer
using convolutional neural networks. In IEEE CVPR, pages

2414–2423, 2016.

[19] A. Ghosh, G. Fyffe, B. Tunwattanapong, J. Busch, X. Yu,

12

and P. Debevec. Multiview face capture using polar-
ized spherical gradient illumination. ACM Trans. Graph.,
30(6):129:1–129:10, 2011.

[20] A. Ghosh, T. Hawkins, P. Peers, S. Frederiksen, and P. De-
bevec. Practical modeling and acquisition of layered facial
reﬂectance. In ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol-
ume 27, page 139. ACM, 2008.

[21] A. Golovinskiy, W. Matusik, H. Pﬁster, S. Rusinkiewicz,
and T. Funkhouser. A statistical model for synthesis of de-
tailed facial geometry. ACM Trans. Graph., 25(3):1025–
1034, 2006.

[22] P. Graham, B. Tunwattanapong, J. Busch, X. Yu, A. Jones,
P. Debevec, and A. Ghosh. Measurement-based Synthesis of
Facial Microgeometry. In EUROGRAPHICS, 2013.

[23] A. Haro, B. Guenterz, and I. Essay. Real-time, Photo-
realistic, Physically Based Rendering of Fine Scale Human
Skin Structure. In S. J. Gortle and K. Myszkowski, editors,
Eurographics Workshop on Rendering, 2001.

[24] A. E. Ichim, S. Bouaziz, and M. Pauly. Dynamic 3d avatar
creation from hand-held video input. ACM Trans. Graph.,
34(4):45:1–45:14, 2015.

[25] V. Kazemi and J. Sullivan. One millisecond face alignment
with an ensemble of regression trees. In IEEE CVPR, pages
1867–1874, 2014.

[26] I. Kemelmacher-Shlizerman.
model. IEEE ICCV, 2013.

Internet-based morphable

[27] I. Kemelmacher-Shlizerman and R. Basri. 3d face recon-
struction from a single image using a single reference face
shape. IEEE TPAMI, 33(2):394–405, 2011.

[28] V. Kwatra, A. Sch¨odl, I. Essa, G. Turk, and A. Bobick.
Graphcut textures: Image and video synthesis using graph
In ACM SIGGRAPH 2003 Papers, SIGGRAPH ’03,
cuts.
pages 277–286. ACM, 2003.

[29] C. Li, K. Zhou, and S. Lin. Intrinsic face image decompo-
sition with human face priors. In ECCV (5)’14, pages 218–
233, 2014.

[30] H. Li, B. Adams, L. J. Guibas, and M. Pauly. Robust single-
view geometry and motion reconstruction. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (Proceedings SIGGRAPH Asia 2009),
28(5), 2009.

[31] H. Li, L. Trutoiu, K. Olszewski, L. Wei, T. Trutna, P.-L.
Hsieh, A. Nicholls, and C. Ma. Facial performance sens-
ing head-mounted display. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(Proceedings SIGGRAPH 2015), 34(4), July 2015.

[32] C. Liu, H.-Y. Shum, and W. T. Freeman. Face hallucination:
Theory and practice. Int. J. Comput. Vision, 75(1):115–134,
2007.

[33] D. S. Ma, J. Correll, and B. Wittenbrink. The chicago face
database: A free stimulus set of faces and norming data. Be-
havior Research Methods, 47(4):1122–1135, 2015.

[34] W.-C. Ma, T. Hawkins, P. Peers, C.-F. Chabert, M. Weiss,
and P. Debevec. Rapid Acquisition of Specular and Diffuse
Normal Maps from Polarized Spherical Gradient Illumina-
tion. In Eurographics Symposium on Rendering, 2007.
[35] S. P. Mallick, T. E. Zickler, D. J. Kriegman, and P. N. Bel-
humeur. Beyond lambert: Reconstructing specular surfaces
using color. In IEEE CVPR, pages 619–626, 2005.

[36] I. Matthews and S. Baker. Active appearance models revis-

ited. Int. J. Comput. Vision, 60(2):135–164, 2004.

[37] U. Mohammed, S. J. D. Prince, and J. Kautz. Visio-lization:
Generating novel facial images. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2009
Papers, pages 57:1–57:8. ACM, 2009.

[38] K. Nagano, G. Fyffe, O. Alexander, J. Barbiˇc, H. Li,
A. Ghosh, and P. Debevec. Skin microstructure deforma-
tion with displacement map convolution. ACM Transactions
on Graphics (Proceedings SIGGRAPH 2015), 34(4), 2015.

[39] K. Olszewski, J. J. Lim, S. Saito, and H. Li. High-ﬁdelity fa-
cial and speech animation for vr hmds. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (Proceedings SIGGRAPH Asia 2016), 35(6), De-
cember 2016.

[40] D. Pathak, P. Krahenbuhl, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and A. A.
Efros. Context encoders: Feature learning by inpainting. In
IEEE CVPR, 2016.

[41] P. Paysan, R. Knothe, B. Amberg, S. Romdhani, and T. Vet-
ter. A 3d face model for pose and illumination invariant face
In Advanced video and signal based surveil-
recognition.
lance, 2009. AVSS’09. Sixth IEEE International Conference
on, pages 296–301. IEEE, 2009.

[42] R. Ramamoorthi and P. Hanrahan. An efﬁcient representa-
tion for irradiance environment maps. In Proceedings of the
28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interac-
tive techniques, pages 497–500. ACM, 2001.

[43] D. Ramanan. Face detection, pose estimation, and landmark
localization in the wild. In IEEE CVPR, pages 2879–2886,
2012.

[44] S. Romdhani. Face image analysis using a multiple features
ﬁtting strategy. PhD thesis, University of Basel, 2005.
[45] S. Romdhani and T. Vetter. Estimating 3d shape and tex-
ture using pixel intensity, edges, specular highlights, texture
constraints and a prior. In CVPR (2), pages 986–993, 2005.
[46] S. Saito, T. Li, and H. Li. Real-time facial segmentation and
performance capture from rgb input. In ECCV, 2016.
[47] F. Shi, H.-T. Wu, X. Tong, and J. Chai. Automatic acquisition
of high-ﬁdelity facial performances using monocular videos.
ACM Trans. Graph., 33(6):222:1–222:13, 2014.

[48] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman.

Very deep convolu-
tional networks for large-scale image recognition. CoRR,
abs/1409.1556, 2014.

[49] Solid Angle, 2016. http://www.solidangle.com/

arnold/.

[50] S. Suwajanakorn, I. Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, and S. M.
In ECCV, pages

Seitz. Total moving face reconstruction.
796–812. Springer, 2014.
[51] The Digital Human League.

Digital Emily 2.0,
http://gl.ict.usc.edu/Research/

2015.
DigitalEmily2/.

[52] J. Thies, M. Zollh¨ofer, M. Stamminger, C. Theobalt, and
M. Nießner. Face2face: Real-time face capture and reen-
actment of rgb videos. In IEEE CVPR, 2016.

[53] M. Turk and A. Pentland. Eigenfaces for recognition. J.

Cognitive Neuroscience, 3(1):71–86, 1991.

[54] L.-Y. Wei and M. Levoy. Fast texture synthesis using tree-
In Proceedings of the 27th
structured vector quantization.
Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques, SIGGRAPH ’00, pages 479–488, 2000.

13

[55] T. Weyrich, W. Matusik, H. Pﬁster, B. Bickel, C. Donner,
C. Tu, J. McAndless, J. Lee, A. Ngan, H. W. Jensen, and
M. Gross. Analysis of human faces using a measurement-
based skin reﬂectance model. ACM Trans. on Graphics
(Proc. SIGGRAPH 2006), 25(3):1013–1024, 2006.

[56] X. Zhu, Z. Lei, X. Liu, H. Shi, and S. Z. Li. Face alignment
across large poses: A 3d solution. CoRR, abs/1511.07212,
2015.

14

