THE IMPORTANCE OF STAIN NORMALIZATION IN COLORECTAL TISSUE
CLASSIFICATION WITH CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORKS

Francesco Ciompi1,2, Oscar Geessink1,2,3, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi1,2, Gabriel Silva de Souza1
Alexi Baidoshvili3, Geert Litjens1,2, Bram van Ginneken2, Iris Nagtegaal1, Jeroen van der Laak1,2
1 Dept. of Pathology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands
2Diagnostic Image Analysis Group, Dept. of Radiology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands
3 Laboratorium Pathologie Oost Nederland, Hengelo, Netherlands

7
1
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
3
2
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
2
v
1
3
9
5
0
.
2
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT

The development of reliable imaging biomarkers for the anal-
ysis of colorectal cancer (CRC) in hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) stained histopathology images requires an accurate
and reproducible classiﬁcation of the main tissue components
in the image. In this paper, we propose a system for CRC
tissue classiﬁcation based on convolutional networks (Con-
vNets). We investigate the importance of stain normalization
in tissue classiﬁcation of CRC tissue samples in H&E-stained
images. Furthermore, we report the performance of ConvNets
on a cohort of rectal cancer samples and on an independent
publicly available dataset of colorectal H&E images.

Index Terms— Digital pathology, Colorectal Cancer,

Deep learning.

1. INTRODUCTION

Adjuvant chemotherapy has been shown to signiﬁcantly in-
crease survival for some patients affected by colorectal can-
cer (CRC), a disease that has a high global incidence of over
1.3 million cases per year, causing 694,000 deaths annually1.
The decision whether a patient should be treated with adju-
vant chemotherapy depends mostly on the tumor stage. How-
ever, patients diagnosed with the same stage of disease can
have considerable diverse outcomes. This indicates the need
for additional biomarkers, beside tumor stage, that will allow
further stratiﬁcation of CRC patients and identify those who
may or may not beneﬁt from adjuvant treatment.

In recent years, researchers have been investigating the
role of histological parameters as new biomarkers to guide
adjuvant treatment decision. Examples are the proportion of
necrosis [1] and the relative amounts of tumor and stroma
[2], which proved to be strong independent prognostic factors
in CRC. Despite the great potential of these new biomark-
ers, their manual assessment suffers from limited clinical ap-
In
plicability and high inter- and intra-observer variability.
this context, the automatic analysis of digitized whole-slide

1globocan.iarc.fr/Pages/fact sheets cancer.aspx

Fig. 1. Samples of CRC tissue from [4] (top) and their stain-
normalized version (bottom) using the algorithm in [5].

histopathology images (WSI) can contribute to the develop-
ment of objective and reproducible imaging biomarkers for
the ﬁeld of clinical pathology.

A key element in the design of imaging biomarkers based
on WSI analysis is the automated pixel-wise classiﬁcation of
relevant tissues and histological structures. In recent years,
convolutional networks (ConvNets) [3] have become the ref-
erence algorithm to solve image- and patch-based classiﬁca-
tion tasks in medical imaging. Recent challenges in digital
pathology2,3,4 showed that methods based on ConvNets can
perform as well or better than pathologists at analyzing hema-
toxylin and eosin (H&E) stained histopathology images.

The procedure of ﬁxation, embedding, cutting and stain-
ing of tissue sections affects the appearance of H&E stained
histology samples, which can vary signiﬁcantly across labo-
ratories, but even across staining batches within the same lab.
Although this variability only partially limits the interpreta-
tion of images by pathologists, it can dramatically affect the
result of automatic image analysis algorithms. To cope with
this problem, stain normalization (SN) algorithms for histo-
logical images have been recently developed [5, 6, 7], with
the aim of matching stain colors of WSI with a given tem-
plate. These SN algorithms have shown great promise to deal
with stain variations. However, the beneﬁt of stain normal-
ization in problems of patch-based tissue classiﬁcation with

2warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/dcs/research/combi/research/bic/glascontest/
3camelyon16.grand-challenge.org/
4tupac.tue-image.nl/

conv5-32 MP

conv5-64 MP

conv3-128 MP

conv3-256 MP

conv9-1024

conv1-512

SM

7 weight layers

Table 1. ConvNets architecture. The nomenclature follows the one used in [8]. MP = max-pooling layer, SM = soft-max layer.

Fig. 2. Example of manual annotations in a rectal cancer sam-
ple using the in-house developed open source software ASAP.

ConvNets has never been investigated.

In this paper, we investigate the importance of stain nor-
malization in tissue classiﬁcation of H&E-stained CRC tis-
sue samples with convolutional networks. Our contribution is
three-fold. First, we propose a convolutional network archi-
tecture to classify 9 tissue types of rectal cancer tissue sam-
ples, which we train and validate on a set of 74 whole-slide
images. Second, we investigate the applicability of the rep-
resentation learned by ConvNets on rectal cancer data from
one source to CRC data from different sources using a recent
publicly available dataset of CRC data. In this procedure, we
investigate the role of two state of the art SN algorithms, com-
paring results with and without stain normalization. Finally,
we address the question how stain normalization should be
used in a tissue classiﬁcation pipeline.

Rectal cancer data. A set of 74 histological slides from 74
patients was prepared from surgically excised rectal carcino-
mas in patients who had not received neoadjuvant chemother-
apy and/or radiotherapy. Slide preparation involved standard
ﬁxation of 2µm tissue sections and H&E staining. Whole-
slide scanning was performed at 200X magniﬁcation (pixel
resolution = 0.455 µm) using a Hamamatsu NanoZoomer 2.0-
HT C9600-13 scanner (Herrsching, Germany), which pro-
duce 74 gigapixel whole-slide images. Manual annotations
of 9 tissue classes were made by an expert using the open
source software ASAP5 developed in-house, which included:
(i) tumor, (ii) stroma, (iii) necrosis, (iv) muscle, (v) healthy
epithelium, (vi) fatty tissue, (vii) lymphocytes, (viii) mucus
and (ix) blood cells (see Figure 2). All annotations were suc-
cessively thoroughly checked by a pathologist and corrections
were made when necessary. In the rest of the paper, we refer
to this dataset as rectal cancer (RC) data.

Colorectal cancer data. A dataset of colorectal cancer im-
ages and patches from 10 patients was recently made pub-
licly available [4]. The test dataset consists of two subsets.
The ﬁrst subset contains 5000 patches of 150×150 pixel ex-
tracted from 10 H&E slides of CRC cases. The patches con-
tain 625 examples of 8 tissue types, namely (i) tumor ep-
ithelium, (ii) simple stroma, (iii) complex stroma, (iv) im-
mune cell conglomerates, (v) debris and mucus, (vi) mucosal
glands, (vii) adipose tissue, (viii) background. We name this
subset as CRCp. The second subset contains 10 tiles of size
5000×5000 pixel of H&E stained CRC tissue samples, which
we call CRCt.

2. METHOD

2.2. Convolutional Network

In this section, we introduce (1) the data used to develop and
validate the proposed method for CRC tissue classiﬁcation,
(2) the approach to build and train a convolutional network,
and (3) the algorithms used to investigate the role of stain
normalization in CRC tissue classiﬁcation with ConvNets.

2.1. Material

In this paper, we used data from two different sources, namely
a cohort of whole-slide images from rectal cancer samples,
and a dataset of colorectal cancer images and patches, which
was recently made publicly available [4]. We used the cohort
of rectal cancer WSIs to train convolutional networks and to
validate the performance in cross-validation. Successively,
we used the CRC dataset to further validate the performance
of ConvNets on an independent dataset and to investigate the
role of stain normalization in CRC tissue classiﬁcation.

The design of ConvNets (see Table 1) was based on the ap-
proach proposed in [8] and consists of a fully convolutional
network [9] with 11 layers. The input of the network is an
RGB patch of size 150×150 pixels, which is the patch size
in CRCp. As in [8], we alternated convolutional (with ReLU
non linearity) and max-pooling layers, starting with 32 ﬁlters
in the ﬁrst layer, and doubling the amount of ﬁlters after ev-
ery max-pooling, but we used slightly larger ﬁlters (5×5) in
the ﬁrst two layers. The output of the network is a 9-elements
vector containing the probability of the patch to belong to one
of the 9 RC tissue types.

2.3. Stain normalization

Stain normalization (SN) involves transforming an image I
into another image ˆI, through the operation ˆI = f (I, θ),

5github.com/GeertLitjens/ASAP

CRC classes

Tumor epithelium

Simple + complex stroma

Immune cells

Debris and mucus

Mucosal glands

Adipose tissue

Background

RC classes

Tumor

Stroma + muscle

Lymphocytes

Necrosis + blood + mucus

Healthy epithelium

Fatty tissue

-

Table 2. Correspondence of classes in the CRC and the classes used in the RC dataset.

training w/ SN

training w/o SN

3.1. Rectal cancer tissue classiﬁcation

testing w/ SN

79.66% [C]

testing w/o SN

45.65% [D]

75.55% [B]

50.96% [A]

Table 3. Accuracy with and without stain normalization (SN)
in the training and testing procedure.

We evaluated the performance of the ConvNet on the RC
dataset using a 5-fold cross-validation approach. We build
each fold selecting 40 WSI for training, 19 for validation and
15 for test, without overlap of patients across datasets. For
each fold, the ConvNet was trained with 4000 iterations of
stochastic gradient descent with a constant learning rate of
0.0003, the ADAM algorithm for the update of the parame-
ters and categorical cross-entropy as loss function. For each
iteration, a mini-batch of 256 patches was built on-the-ﬂy by
randomly sampling a balanced amount of patches from each
manually annotated class in the training set. Data was aug-
mented by rotating each patch of 90, 180 and 270 degrees,
increasing the amount of training patches to approximately
4 million per fold. During training, the performance of the
system was monitored by classifying a ﬁxed validation set
of 45000 samples (5000 per class). After training, the per-
formance was measured by comparing the label of pixels in
the regions manually annotated and the result of the classiﬁer
over the 74 WSIs in the RC dataset. An overall 9-class accu-
racy of 93.8% was obtained. Overall performance of per-class
sensitivity and speciﬁcity are reported in Figure 3.

3.2. The importance of stain normalization

The deﬁnition of classes in our RC data is slightly different
from the one coming with the CRC dataset. Therefore, we
grouped corresponding classes as described in Table 2, which
resulted in a 6-class problem, used to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the trained ConvNet applied to CRC data. Applying
the ConvNet directly to CRC data gave a poor accuracy value
of 50.96% (experiment A). Based on this result, we investi-
gated the role of staining in this classiﬁcation task. For this
purpose, we selected a representative RC image from the RC
cohort as the template image to deﬁne the mapping param-
eters θ for the SN1 and SN2 algorithms9. Successively, we
stain-normalized patches in the CRC dataset and classiﬁed it
again with the same ConvNet. Stain normalization allowed to
remarkably improve the accuracy by more than 20%, reach-
ing values of 75.55% (experiment B) and 73.99% accuracy
for SN1 and SN2 respectively. Besides the difference in ac-
curacy, we found that SN2 failed to normalize 3 patches of
adipose tissue, and it tends to force color normalization re-
gardless of the type of tissue considered. As an example, in
Figure 4, two CRC patches are depicted, containing tumor
and blood cells respectively. While both SN1 and SN2 cor-
rectly normalize stain for the tumor patch, the characteristic

9The function f (I, θ) for SN1 is available in the form of look-up table at

https://github.com/francescociompi/stain-normalization-isbi-2017

Fig. 3. Per-class sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the proposed
ConvNet on the 9-class rectal cancer dataset.

where θ is a set of parameters extracted from a predeﬁned
template image and f is the mapping function that matches
the visual appearance of a given image to the template image.
The parameters θ are generally deﬁned to capture color in-
formation of the main stain components in the image (e.g. H
and E). As a result, stain-normalized images will have a dis-
tribution of colors that resemble the ones of the template. In
Figure 1, images from CRCt and their stain-normalized ver-
sion based on the WSI template of Figure 2 are depicted.

In this paper, we considered two state of the art SN algo-
rithms. The ﬁrst one is based on the method recently pub-
lished by Bejnordi et al. [5], which we refer to as SN1. The
second one is based on the method published by Macenko
et al. [6], which was mentioned as the reference method for
stain normalization in the TUPAC6 and AMIDA7 challenges
and has a publicly available MATLAB implementation8. We
refer to this method as SN2.

3. EXPERIMENTS

We performed three kinds of evaluation. First, we evaluated
the performance of the proposed ConvNet at classifying RC
data at WSI level in cross-validation. Second, we evaluated
the performance of the same ConvNet, trained on RC data,
applied to the independent CRC data set. In this second ex-
periment, we compared two state-of-the-art stain normaliza-
tion algorithms by matching the color space of CRC data with
the RC data used for training. As part of the second experi-
ment, we also analyze the importance of stain normalization
applied to training and test data.

6tupac.tue-image.nl/
7amida13.isi.uu.nl/
8github.com/mitkovetta/staining-normalization

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Fig. 4. Samples from CRCp for tumor (a) and debris (d) class,
together with result of SN1 (b, e) and of SN2 (c, f).

Fig. 5. ConvNet tissue classiﬁcation results on CRCt data.

red color of blood cells is completely lost using SN2, while
SN1 keeps a substantial component of the red channel.

Based on the positive result of the previous experiment,
the question remains whether stain normalization should only
be applied to test data or also to training data. To address
this question, we introduced SN1 in our training and testing
pipeline and evaluated the accuracy of a ConvNet trained on
RC data and applied to CRC data in four different conﬁgura-
tions, namely with (experiment C) and without (experiment
D) stain normalization applied to RC (training) data and to
CRC (test) data. The results are reported in Table 3, where
for the sake of clarity a letter is assigned to the result of each
combination. As expected, experiment D resulted in the low-
est performance, since the ConvNet does not learn any stain
variability from the training set, while such a variability is ex-
pected in the test set. Although all the training cases come
from the same cohort and staining was done in the same lab,
experiment C gave an improvement of ≈ 5% accuracy com-
pared to B, which indicates that the ConvNet can beneﬁt from
the variability in the training set. It is worth noting that ex-
perimental settings of A represents what is commonly done in
digital pathology research, where training data from a given
cohort, with some variability are used to train a classiﬁer,
whose performance are evaluated on an independent set of
data coming from different laboratories and stained with dif-
ferent procedures. Experiment B reduced the variability in
the test set by adapting data to match the stain distribution of
the template image. Finally, experiment C showed a substan-
tial improvement compared to all other possible combinations
of settings. Qualitative results of images in CRCt classiﬁed
under the settings of experiment C are depicted in Figure 5.

4. CONCLUSION

We have presented an approach based on convolutional net-
works for multi-class classiﬁcation of CRC tissue in H&E
histopathology images. Applying stain normalization to train-
ing and test data takes out of the equation most of the sources
of variability due to staining. Based on our experiments, we
conclude that stain normalization is a necessary step to in-
clude in the training and evaluation pipeline of an automatic
system for CRC tissue classiﬁcation based on ConvNets.

5. REFERENCES

[1] Marion Pollheimer et al.,

“Tumor necrosis is a new
promising prognostic factor in colorectal cancer,” Human
Pathology, vol. 41, pp. 1749–1757, 2010.

[2] A. Huijbers et al., “The proportion of tumor-stroma as
a strong prognosticator for stage II and III colon cancer
patients: validation in the Victor trial.,” Ann Oncol, vol.
24, no. 1, pp. 179–185, Jan 2013.

[3] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton,
“Deep Learning,” Nature, vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–
444, 2015.

[4] Jakob Nikolas Kather et al., “Multi-class texture analysis
in colorectal cancer histology,” Scientiﬁc Reports, vol. 6,
2016.

[5] Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi et al., “Stain speciﬁc stan-
images,”
dardization of whole-slide histopathological
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, vol. 35, no. 2,
pp. 404–415, Sep 2016.

[6] Marc Macenko et al., “A method for normalizing histol-
ogy slides for quantitative analysis,” in 2009 IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: From Nano
to Macro. 2009, pp. 1107–1110, IEEE.

[7] A. M. Khan, N. Rajpoot, D. Treanor, and D. Magee,
“A nonlinear mapping approach to stain normalization in
digital histopathology images using image-speciﬁc color
deconvolution,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engi-
neering, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 1729–1738, June 2014.

[8] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman,

“Very deep
convolutional networks for large-scale image recogni-
tion,” arXiv:14091556, 2014.

[9] Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell,
“Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmenta-
tion,” arXiv:14114038, 2015.

The authors would like to thank NVIDIA Corporation for the donation of
a GeForce GTX Titan X graphics card used in the experiments. This project
was supported by the Alpe dHuZes / Dutch Cancer Society Fund (grant num-
ber KUN 2014-7032).

