Affective Lexicon Creation for the Greek Language

Elisavet Palogiannidi1,2, Polychronis Koutsakis4, Elias Iosif 2,3, Alexandros Potamianos2,3
1School of ECE, Technical University of Crete, Chania 73100, Greece
2“Athena” Research and Innovation Center, Maroussi 15125, Athens, Greece
3School of ECE, National Technical University of Athens, Zografou 15780, Greece
4School of Engineering and Information Technology, Murdoch University, Australia
epalogiannidi@isc.tuc.gr, p.koutsakis@murdoch.edu.au, {iosife,potam}@central.ntua.gr

Abstract
Starting from the English affective lexicon ANEW (Bradley and Lang, 1999a) we have created the ﬁrst Greek affective lexicon. It
contains human ratings for the three continuous affective dimensions of valence, arousal and dominance for 1034 words. The Greek
affective lexicon is compared with affective lexica in English, Spanish and Portuguese. The lexicon is automatically expanded by
selecting a small number of manually annotated words to bootstrap the process of estimating affective ratings of unknown words. We
experimented with the parameters of the semantic-affective model in order to investigate their impact to its performance, which reaches
85% binary classiﬁcation accuracy (positive vs. negative ratings). We share the Greek affective lexicon that consists of 1034 words and
the automatically expanded Greek affective lexicon that contains 407K words.

Keywords: affective lexicon, affective ratings, valence, arousal, dominance, semantic similarity, sentiment analysis, emotion
recognition

1.

Introduction

Emotions are an integral part of human cognition, helping
humans make decisions even in cases when uncertainty and
ambiguity are introduced by cognitive analysis (Bechara et
al., 2000). Hence, emotion detection attracts the interest of
researchers from numerous areas such as psychology, lin-
guistics, and engineering.
In order to model emotion as it is experienced by hu-
mans, resources that contain emotion information in var-
(Lang et al., 1999)
ious modalities become a necessity.
created a picture stimuli resource, known as International
Affective Picture System (IAPS). Each stimulus is anno-
tated on the affective dimensions Valence, Arousal and
Dominance (V,A,D). The International Affective Digitized
Sounds (IADS) is the corresponding resource with sound
stimuli that was created by (Bradley and Lang, 1999b).
(Bradley and Lang, 1999a) in their attempt to provide a set
of normative emotional ratings for English words. They
created an affective lexicon for English, a.k.a. ANEW (Af-
fective Norms for English Words). ANEW contains 1034
words and each word is assigned with one score per af-
fective dimension (V,A,D). Since then, numerous affective
lexica in many languages have been created. (Redondo et
al., 2007) translated the ANEW into Spanish and (Soares
et al., 2012) into European Portuguese. (Monteﬁnese et al.,
2014) translated the ANEW into Italian and augmented it
with more words. Additionally to ANEW, affective lexica
with less or more entries can be found for a number of other
languages such as German (Kanske and Kotz, 2010) and
Dutch (Moors et al., 2013). Bilingual approaches have been
reported as well, e.g., (Eilola and Havelka, 2010) created
affective norms from English and Finish nouns. (Gilet et
al., 2012) provided an affective lexicon of French attributes
and investigated the age inﬂuence on the ratings collection
process. The words of ANEW were also annotated with
respect to discrete (categorical) emotions by (Stevenson et

al., 2007).
Our contribution to the multilingual collection of affective
lexica, is the creation of the ﬁrst Greek affective lexicon.
The affective lexicon is expanded automatically to cover a
Greek vocabulary of 407K words using the affective lexi-
con expansion method of (Malandrakis et al., 2013). Per-
formance in terms of correlation with human ratings and bi-
nary classiﬁcation accuracy is estimated for the Greek and
English language with consistent results.

2. Computational models for Emotion
Affective lexica contain words in a target language that are
labeled with respect to affective dimensions. The scores of
each affective dimension can be either categorical, i.e., ba-
sic emotions such as happiness and sadness, or continuous,
i.e., a score in a given range over an emotional dimension.
In the continuous representation, emotion can be suf-
ﬁciently described by three emotional dimensions: 1)
V alence is the subjective feeling of pleasantness or un-
pleasantness and ranges from highly positive to highly neg-
ative, 2) Arousal is the subjective state of feeling activated
or deactivated and ranges from calming or soothing to ex-
citing or agitating, 3) Dominance represents the control-
ling and dominant nature of the emotion1 (Warriner et al.,
2013).
The affective lexica we use follow a speciﬁc structure i.e.,
each entry consists of a word (seed word) and a triplet that
indicates the affective scores for each dimension (V,A,D).
The disadvantage of manually created lexica is that they
have low language coverage, since they contain only a few
thousand words. Thus computational methods are used to
create or expand an already existing lexicon. (Malandrakis
et al., 2013) expands such affective lexica covering a sig-

1For instance while both fear and anger are unpleasant emo-
tions, anger is a dominant emotion, while fear is a submissive
emotion

2867

niﬁcant fraction of the vocabulary of a language. Senti-
WordNet and WordNetAffect are examples of large affec-
tive resources created through computational models.
In
the ﬁrst, (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006) annotated automat-
ically all WordNet (Miller, 1995) synsets. The latter was
developed by (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004) who repre-
sented the affective meanings by selecting and labeling a
subset of WordNet synsets. Computational models for af-
fective text usually incorporate small manually created re-
sources (Malandrakis et al., 2011), or larger automatically
created resources (Chaumartin, 2007).

3. The Greek affective lexicon
In this section, we describe the Greek affective lexicon cre-
ation process. We suggest that the words of an already ex-
isting affective lexicon can be transferred to the language of
interest. Then, they can be shared to the target language’s
native speakers in order to collect the affective ratings. This
process is depicted in Figure 1.

We assume that if many people repeat the annotation for
a speciﬁc word, the expected value of the ratings will ap-
proximate the true affective score of this word. For this
reason each word was rated by 20 participants. Regard-
ing the ratings that were collected, no extreme annotator
biases were noticed and hence, none of the annotators was
excluded from the process. Fleiss’ kappa was applied in
order to measure the annotators’ agreement for each word.
The average Fleiss’ kappa over all the words indicates fair
agreement for valence (κ = 0.29) and and less so for dom-
inance (κ = 0.23) and arousal (κ = 0.20)3.
The distributions of the ratings collected for each affective
dimension are shown in Figure 2, where dashed lines de-
note the median values. Comparing the ratings of the three
dimensions, we observe the valence distribution is clearly
bimodal, which is not as clear for the other two distribu-
tions. The concentration is higher on words with high va-
lence. This result was also observed by (Monteﬁnese et al.,
2014).

Figure 1: Affective lexicon creation process.

Figure 2: Distribution of the ratings collected for (V,A,D).

In Figure 3, the valence-arousal distribution for the words
of the Greek affective lexicon is depicted. Each point corre-
sponds to a word, and some words (translated into English)
are shown. The distribution appears to follow the V-shape,
well known from literature. The interpretation of V-shape
is that negative and positive words generally tend to have
high arousal, while words with neutral valence have neutral
arousal as well.

The main steps of this process are: (1) translation of ANEW
words from English to Greek and (2) the collection of hu-
man affective ratings. The end result is the Greek affective
lexicon that consists of 1034 words annotated on (V,A,D).
Translation of the ANEW words to Greek was split into
two steps: translation proposals and post-correction. In this
way we managed to address the word sense ambiguity is-
sues between the two languages.
Collection of human affective ratings took place in a class-
room of 105 engineering students (87 males, 18 females),
native Greek speakers, aged from 19 to 30. Each word was
rated with respect to (V,A,D) using the 9-point SAM scale
(Bradley and Lang, 1994). Each participant was given a
sheet with approximately 200 words, a sheet with instruc-
tions and the Self Assessment Scale (SAM) pictures 2 for
providing their ratings by circling the corresponding image.
In order to avoid context inﬂuence the word order was ran-
domized. The participants had one hour at their disposal to
complete the procedure.

3.1. Affective ratings
Affective annotation is a very subjective task and two (or
more) people may provide very different ratings for a word.

2Nine pictures were used to describe each affective dimension

as shown in (Bradley and Lang, 1994).

Figure 3: Valence-Arousal distribution of Greek ANEW.

3The reported κ values were estimated on 9-point scale. When
9-point scale is transformed to 3-point scale the κ values are
higher indicating good agreement for valence (κ = 0.68) and
moderate agreement for arousal (κ = 0.46) and dominance
(κ = 0.49)

2868

In Figure 4, we show the distributions of the mean values of
valence and arousal for the four languages in which ANEW
is available. Greek, English (Bradley and Lang, 1999a),
Spanish (Redondo et al., 2007) and European Portuguese
(Soares et al., 2012) contain the same lexical information,
i.e., the same 1034 English words have been translated to
the respective languages. The distributions are consistent
for the four languages, with the differentiation that the V-
shape in Greek is not as clear as in the other languages for
words with negative valence.

Figure 4: Valence-arousal distributions across languages.

4. Automatic affective lexicon expansion

The model we use for the automatic expansion of the af-
fective lexicon was ﬁrst proposed by (Malandrakis et al.,
2013) and it is an extension of (Turney and Littman, 2002).
It requires a small manually annotated affective lexicon for
bootstrapping the process of estimating affective ratings of
unknown words. The model aims to characterize the affec-
tive content of words from the reader perspective estimat-
ing scores in the continuous range [-1,1]. In order to start
the process, an affective lexicon with human ratings and a
semantic model for estimating the semantic similarity be-
tween two words are required. N words are selected from
the affective lexicon to serve as seed words. The underly-
ing assumption is that the affective rating of an unknown
word can be estimated by using: a) the affective ratings of
seed words weighted with a semantic similarity metric, that
expresses how similar the seed word is to the word of in-
terest, and b) a weight coefﬁcient that aims to capture the
importance of the selected seed to the affective estimation.
The model is deﬁned as follows:

ˆυ(wj) = a0 +

aiυ(wi)S(wj, wi),

(1)

N
(cid:88)

i=1

where wj is the unknown word, ˆυ(wj) is the affective rating
of word wj, w1..N are the seed words, υ(wi) and ai are the
affective rating and the weight that corresponds to the seed
wi, respectively and a0 is the bias. S(·) denotes a metric
for computing the semantic similarity between two words.
The weights ai were assigned to each seed because not all
seeds are equally salient for the affective ratings estimation

2869

of words. They were estimated by using Least Square Es-
timation (LSE) between the predicted and actual ratings,
as described in (Malandrakis et al., 2013). Motivated by
(Palogiannidi et al., 2015) we use a regularized LSE, i.e.,
Ridge Regression (RR) that incorporates a regularization
factor that forces the weights to shrink toward zero.

4.1. Semantic similarity features
The S(·) metric used in (1) can be computed within the
framework of distributional semantic models that adopt the
distributional hypothesis of meaning, i.e., “similarity of
context implies similarity of meaning”, (Harris, 1954). A
contextual window of size 2H +1 words is centred on the
word of interest wi and lexical features are extracted. For
every instance of wi in the corpus the H words left and
right of wi are extracted, formulating a feature vector xi.
The semantic similarity between two words, wi and wj, is
computed as the cosine of their feature vectors:

QH (wi, wj) = xi.xj

||xi|| ||xj || .

(2)

The elements of feature vectors can be weighted according
to various schemes based on the corpus frequencies of wi
and wj (Iosif and Potamianos, 2010). In this work, a binary
and a PPMI based weighting scheme are used. According
to the binary scheme the vector elements are set either to
zero or to one. For the PPMI weighting scheme, vector el-
ements are weighted using the positive point-wise mutual
information (PPMI) metric. The point-wise mutual infor-
mation (PMI) between the word wi and the n–th feature of
its vector xi, f n
i , was computed as in (Church and Hanks,
1990):

P M I(wi, f n

i ) = −log

ˆp(wi, f n
i )
ˆp(wi)ˆp(f n
i )

,

(3)

where ˆp(wi) and ˆp(f n
i ) are the occurrence probabilities
of wi and f n
, respectively, while the probability of their
i
co-occurrence (within the H window size) is denoted by
ˆp(wi, f n
i ). The probabilities were computed according to
maximum likelihood estimation using corpus-based word
frequencies. PMI is unbounded, yielding scores that lie in
the [−∞, +∞] interval. PPMI is equivalent to PMI with the
modiﬁcation that the negative scores are set to zero. This
is based on the assumption that the contextual features that
exhibit negative PMI with the target word (e.g., wi) do not
contribute to the estimation of similarity as much as the fea-
tures characterized by positive PMI (Bullinaria and Levy,
2007).
In addition to the context-based metrics where second or-
der word co-occurrences are used, the similarity of words
can be also estimated by considering their ﬁrst-order co-
occurrence statistics. The underlying assumption is that the
co-occurrence of words within a speciﬁed context serves as
indicator for their semantic relatedness. In this work, we
employ a widely-used metric, namely, Google-based se-
mantic relatedness (G) proposed in (Gracia et al., 2006).
The word co-occurrence was regarded at the sentential
level. A comparison of both types of metrics is presented
in (Iosif and Potamianos, 2015) for the task of similarity
computation between nouns.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 5: (a) Valence classiﬁcation accuracy of binary and PPMI weighting schemes for English (En) and Greek (Gr)
and V-A-D performance using PPMI weighting scheme for Greek and English: (b) classiﬁcation accuracy, (c) Pearson
correlation.

5. Experiments and evaluation
In order to estimate semantic similarities for a language, a
corpus was created using web-harvested data as follows. A
lexicon was deﬁned for each language: 135K and 407K en-
tries for English and Greek, respectively. For each lexicon
entry a web search query was formulated, while the snip-
pets of 1K top-ranked documents were downloaded and ag-
gregated. Regarding the corpus-based QH similarity met-
ric, a narrow window size was used (H = 1).
The affective lexicon expansion is evaluated on each lan-
guage’s affective lexicon, applying 10-fold cross validation,
using different numbers of seed words. The experimen-
tal procedure and seed selection algorithm is as in (Malan-
In brief, N seed words are selected
drakis et al., 2013).
from the affective lexicon in order to create a balanced set
(the sum of the seeds’ affective ratings to be as close to
zero as possible), and then a training phase follows in order
to learn the weights that correspond to each seed. When
ridge regression is used, a tuning step is necessary in or-
der to estimate the appropriate regularization factor. Tun-
ing takes place on held out data and the regularization fac-
tor is selected in order to maximize the correlation between
the estimated and the human rated affective ratings. The
experimental procedure is described in more detail in (Ma-
landrakis et al., 2013; Palogiannidi et al., 2015). Two eval-
uation metrics were used: two-class (binary) classiﬁcation
accuracy and Pearson correlation coefﬁcient with respect to
human ratings for the Greek and the English language.
In Figure 5(a) we show the classiﬁcation accuracy for va-
lence, using binary and PPMI-based weighting scheme.
Both for English and Greek, PPMI clearly outperforms the
simpler binary feature vector scheme. In Figure 5(b) we
present the classiﬁcation accuracy and in Figure 5(c) the
correlation performance for V-A-D using the PPMI weight-
ing schemes. The performance of the affective model is
high, especially for valence and dominance, which is ex-
pected, given that valence and dominance are highly corre-
lated (0.86 in Greek and 0.84 in English). The performance
achieved for arousal is relatively poor. The results are con-
sistent with respect to the V-A-D dimensions for both lan-
guages, although results for Greek are consistently lower
than for English for all three dimensions4. The affective

4This may be attributed to the differences on syntax and mor-

phology that exist between the two languages.

model appears to be robust and high performing when at
least 100 seeds are used reaching the highest performance
for 500-600 seeds.
In Figure 6 (a), (b), we show the correlation between
the valence estimated and human collected ratings in En-
glish and Greek, respectively. Speciﬁcally, both context
and co-occurrence based semantic similarity metrics were
tested with the semantic-affective model. When the co-
occurrence-based metric is used we observe that the model
lacks robustness, and performance drops especially for
large number of seeds. However, when RR is used per-
formance is robust and also the correlation curve is quite
close to the one observed when context-based similarities
are used. Correlation of Greek valence ratings when co-
occurrence based semantic similarities are used in com-
bination with RR is much higher than when using them
with LSE. Still, it is much lower than the correlation when
context-based similarities are used. Language morphology
and characteristics may be responsible for the performance
differences between the two languages.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: Correlation of automatically estimated and hu-
man collected valence ratings for English (a) and Greek (b)
using different semantic similarity and weights estimation
methods.

6. Shared data
We share two resources. The Greek affective lexicon5
that consists of 1034 Greek words annotated with respect
to valence, arousal and dominance. We share the Greek
words, the index of the word in ANEW that was translated

5http://www.telecom.tuc.gr/

˜epalogiannidi/docs/resources/greek_
affective_lexicon.zip

2870

in Greek and the affective ratings in the range [−1, 1]. We
also share the automatically estimated affective lexicon for
the Greek language6. This lexicon contains approximately
407K Greek words (selected from the aspell dictionary and
the Greek Wikipedia) that are labelled with respect to va-
lence, arousal and dominance. The affective labels have
been estimated through the affective model deﬁned by (1)
using binary weighting scheme and their range is [−1, 1].

7. Conclusions

We created the ﬁrst affective lexicon for the Greek language
and we collected affective lexica ratings consistent with
other languages. The affective lexicon expansion model
was evaluated both on English and Greek for the three af-
fective dimensions achieving consistent results. We showed
the impact of the semantic similarity metric to the affec-
tive ratings estimation with two ways: 1) comparing differ-
ent types of semantic similarity metrics 2) using different
weighting schemes during the semantic model computa-
tion. Moreover, we showed that semantic similarity metrics
that are not very appropriate for the affective ratings esti-
mation task, can achieve robust performance when they are
combined with the appropriate weight learning technique
(e.g., co-occurrence-based semantic similarities with ridge
regression).
In future work we will study the universality of the pre-
sented affective model by experimenting with more lan-
guages. Also, we will investigate the creation of lexical re-
sources that consist of larger lexical units, e.g., word pairs.

8. Acknowledgments

This work has been partially funded by the SpeDial project
supported by the EU FP7 with grant num. 611396 and the
BabyRobot project supported by the EU Horizon 2020 Pro-
gramme with grant num. 687831. Many thanks to Nikos
Malandrakis for sharing his resources and codebase.

9. References

Bechara, A., Damasio, H., and Damasio, A. (2000). Emo-
tion, decision making and the orbitofrontal cortex. Cere-
bral cortex, 10(3):295–307.

Bradley, M. and Lang, P.

(1994). Measuring emotion:
The self-assessment manikin and the semantic differ-
ential. Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry,
25(1):49–59.

Bradley, M. and Lang, P. (1999a). Affective norms for En-
glish words (ANEW): Stimuli, instruction manual and
affective ratings, technical report c-1. Technical report,
The Center for Research in Psychophysiology, Univer-
sity of Florida.

Bradley, M. and Lang, P. (1999b). The international affec-
tive digitized sounds (IADS)[: stimuli, instruction man-
ual and affective ratings]. Technical report, NIMH Cen-
ter for the Study of Emotion and Attention.

6http://www.telecom.tuc.gr/

˜epalogiannidi/docs/resources/greek_
affective_lexicon_automatically_created.zip

Bullinaria, J. A. and Levy, J. P.

(2007). Extracting se-
mantic representations from word co-occurrence statis-
tics: a computational study. Behavior Research Meth-
ods, 39(3):510–526.

Chaumartin, F. (2007). Upar7: A knowledge-based sys-
tem for headline sentiment tagging. In Proc. of SemEval,
pages 422–425. ACL.

Church, K. W. and Hanks, P. (1990). Word association
norms, mutual information, and lexicography. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 16(1):22–29.

Eilola, T. M. and Havelka, J. (2010). Affective norms for
210 British English and Finnish nouns. Behavior Re-
search Methods, 42(1):134–140.

Esuli, A. and Sebastiani, F. (2006). SentiWordNet: A pub-
licly available lexical resource for opinion mining. In
Proc. of LREC, pages 417–422.

Gilet, A., Gr¨uhn, D., Studer, J., and Labouvie-Vief, G.
(2012). Valence, arousal, and imagery ratings for 835
French attributes by young, middle-aged, and older
adults: The French Emotional Evaluation List (FEEL).
European Review of Applied Psychology, 62(3):173–
181.

Gracia, J., Trillo, R., Espinoza, M., and Mena, E. (2006).
Querying the web: A multiontology disambiguation
method. In Proc. of International Conference on Web
Engineering, pages 241–248.

Harris, Z.

(1954). Distributional Structure. Word,

10(23):146–162.

Iosif, E. and Potamianos, A. (2010). Unsupervised Seman-
tic Similarity Computation Between Terms Using Web
Documents. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 20(11):1637–1647.
Iosif, E. and Potamianos, A.

Similarity
computation using semantic networks created from
web-harvested data. Natural Language Engineering,
21(01):49–79.

(2015).

Kanske, P. and Kotz, S. (2010). Leipzig affective norms for
German: A reliability study. Behavior research methods,
42(4):987–991.

Lang, P., Bradley, M., and Cuthbert, B. (1999). Interna-
tional affective picture system (IAPS): Technical manual
and affective ratings. Technical report, Gainesville, FL:
The Center for Research in Psychophysiology, Univer-
sity of Florida.

Malandrakis, N., Potamianos, A., Iosif, E., and Narayanan,
S. (2011). Kernel Models for Affective Lexicon Cre-
ation. In Proc. of Interspeech, pages 2977–2980.

Malandrakis, N., Potamianos, A., Iosif, E., and Narayanan,
S. (2013). Distributional semantic models for affective
text analysis. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
Language Processing, 21(11):2379–2392.

Miller, G. (1995). WordNet: a lexical database for English.

Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–41.

Monteﬁnese, M., Ambrosini, E., Fairﬁeld, B., and Mam-
marella, N.
(2014). The adaptation of the Affective
Norms for English Words (ANEW) for Italian. Behav-
ior research methods, 46(3):887–903.

Moors, A., De Houwer, J., Hermans, D., Wanmaker, S.,
Van Schie, K., Van Harmelen, A., De Schryver, M.,

2871

(2013). Norms of
De Winne, J., and Brysbaert, M.
valence, arousal, dominance, and age of acquisition
for 4,300 Dutch words. Behavior research methods,
45(1):169–177.

Palogiannidi, E., Iosif, E., Koutsakis, P., and Potamianos,
A. (2015). Valence, Arousal and Dominance Estimation
for English, German, Greek, Portuguese and Spanish
Lexica using Semantic Models. In Proc. of Interspeech,
pages 1527–1531.

Redondo, J., Fraga, I., Padron, I., and Comesana, M.
(2007). The Spanish adaptation of ANEW (Affective
Norms for English Words). Behavior Research Methods,
39(3):600–605.

Soares, A. P., Comesa˜na, M., Pinheiro, A. P., Sim˜oes, A.,
and Frade, C. S. (2012). The adaptation of the Affective
Norms for English Words (ANEW) for European Por-
tuguese. Behavior Research Methods, 44(1):256–269.
Stevenson, R., Mikels, J., and James, T. (2007). Character-
ization of the affective norms for English words by dis-
crete emotional categories. Behavior Research Methods,
39(4):1020–1024.

Strapparava, C. and Valitutti, A. (2004). WordNet Affect:
In LREC, pages

an Affective Extension of WordNet.
1083–1086.

Turney, P. and Littman, M. (2002). Unsupervised learn-
ing of semantic orientation from a hundred-billion-word
corpus, technical report ERC-1094 (NRC 44929). Tech-
nical report, National Research Council of Canada.

Warriner, A. B., Kuperman, V., and Brysbaert, M. (2013).
Norms of valence, arousal, and dominance for 13,915 en-
glish lemmas. Behavior research methods, 45(4):1191–
1207.

2872

