Inspiring Computer Vision System Solutions

Julian Zilly 1 Amit Boyarski 2 Micael Carvalho 3 Amir Atapour Abarghouei 4 Konstantinos Amplianitis 5
Aleksandr Krasnov 6 Massimiliano Mancini 7 Hernán Gonzalez 8 Riccardo Spezialetti 9
Carlos Sampedro Pérez 10 Hao Li 11

7
1
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
2
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
2
7
0
.
7
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

The "digital Michelangelo project" was a semi-
nal computer vision project in the early 2000’s
that pushed the capabilities of acquisition sys-
tems and involved multiple people from diverse
ﬁelds, many of whom are now leaders in indus-
try and academia. Reviewing this project with
modern eyes provides us with the opportunity to
reﬂect on several issues, relevant now as then to
the ﬁeld of computer vision and research in gen-
eral, that go beyond the technical aspects of the
work.

This article was written in the context of a read-
ing group competition at the week-long Inter-
national Computer Vision Summer School 2017
(ICVSS) on Sicily, Italy. To deepen the par-
ticipants understanding of computer vision and
to foster a sense of community, various read-
ing groups were tasked to highlight important
lessons which may be learned from provided lit-
erature, going beyond the contents of the paper.
This report is the winning entry of this guided
discourse (Fig. 3). The authors closely examined
the origins, fruits and most importantly lessons
about research in general which may be distilled
from the "digital Michelangelo project". Discus-
sions leading to this report were held within the
group as well as with Hao Li, the group mentor.

1ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2Technion, Haifa, Israel 3Université
Pierre et Marie Curie, LIP6, France 4Durham University, United
Kingdom 5Trinity College Dublin, Ireland 6Apple Inc., USA
7Sapienza University of Rome,
Italy 8Paris-Sud University,
France 9University of Bologna, Italy 10Centre for Automation
and Robotics (CAR) CSIC-UPM, Madrid, Spain 11University
of Southern California, Department of Computer Science, USA
Julian Zilly
Inc., USA. Correspondence to:
& Pinscreen,
<jzilly@ethz.ch>.

Figure 1. Photograph of the scanning of the head of Michelan-
gelo’s "David" statue photographed by Marc Levoy and Paul De-
bevec, March 28, 1999.

1. Introduction

The seminal paper "The digital Michelangelo project"
(Levoy et al., 2000) encapsulates the design and imple-
mentation of software and hardware requirements for the
digitization of large historical artifacts, mostly including
Michelangelo’s sculpture artwork. The project involved a
team of 30 people who spent a year scanning 10 statues cre-
ated by Michelangelo, two building interiors and a marble
map of ancient Rome, using a state-of-the-art of the time
laser scanner mounted on a customized gantry. A sample
photograph of this process is shown in Fig. 1.

The project was conducted in the wild (non-laboratory con-
ditions) and extreme precision was required to capture tiny
bumps, and chisel marks intentionally left by the artist.
Furthermore, due to the fragility of the subjects and their
cultural and historical value, a non-contact mode of digiti-
zation had to be utilized to avoid harming the artwork. All
these factors contributed to the design of the scanner.

The paper contains an exhaustive description and analysis
of the challenges encountered during the project, including,
but not limited to, optical characteristics of marble in gen-
eral, the bias caused by subsurface scattering in the statues
with respect to the type of marble and their coating, poor
color ﬁdelity due to the cross-talk between the laser and

Inspiring Computer Vision System Solutions (ICVSS)

the broadband luminaire, conﬁguration of the gantry and
the scan head, deﬂection of the gantry during panning and
tilting, alignment of the scans, and other software and hard-
ware issues alike.

Calibration was performed in six pre-planned stages to
ensure accuracy and repeatability of the system. During
the post-processing step, range scans had to be manually
aligned by the users, which in the end proved to be very
time-consuming. Acquired color information was mapped
onto the mesh after correcting for the ambient illumination,
distortions, chromatic aberration, and radiometric effects.
Every color associated with a mesh vertex was converted to
reﬂectance through deshading. Then, when different color
images were captured for a vertex, the reﬂectance would
blend following a series of predeﬁned rules. Additionally,
due to the system’s restrictions with respect to time, special
measures were put in place to handle the large amount of
collected data (two billion polygons and 36 gigabytes for
the statue of David alone). Incredible care in planning and
preparation helped in the realization of the project, and the
encountered challenges have paved the way to new direc-
tions in research.

2. Computer vision - a journey from past to

future

With the advent of deep learning, it is easy to forget that
algorithms tell only half the story of computer vision. The
other half is told by sensors, which provide a bridge be-
tween the real and the digital world. Indeed, the term “ma-
chine vision” refers both to the ability of a machine to as-
sign meaning to an image, as well as to its ability to acquire
this image.

This versatility of machine vision systems is manifested
in both new modalities captured such as hyperspectral and
light ﬁeld imaging (Chang, 2003; Ng et al., 2005), and in
new active and passive acquisition methods such as LIDAR
(Schwarz, 2010) and Dynamic Vision Sensors (Lichtsteiner
et al., 2008). The 3D scanning system described in (Levoy
et al., 2000) is an example of such a system. In years past,
it has inspired an astonishing number of engineering efforts
to gain more precise sensors for vision tasks.

Works like (Levoy et al., 2000) can be considered part of
the classical computer vision canon, relying heavily on the
classical sciences. One could ask what the role of geometry
and physics is in the emerging age of data-based computer
vision. Apart from the apparent need for acquisition sys-
tems to provide high quality datasets, it is important to re-
member that developing such systems provides us not only
with the mechanism to acquire high quality data, but also
with a better understanding of the physical world which in
turn can be used to simulate such data.

For decades, computer vision has followed a bottom-up ap-
proach, trying to devise models that capture exact interac-
tions between vision systems and the physical world. De-
spite the inability of such models to provide state-of-the-art
results on par with human capabilities, they can be lever-
aged to support newer techniques through their integration
in machine learning pipelines. This leads us to the encour-
aging thought that many of the models developed by the
previous generation of researchers will not fall into obliv-
ion.

3. Roots of the paper

In science we often remind ourselves that we are standing
on the shoulders of giants. With this in mind, we would
like to shed some light on the sources, the inﬂuences that
inspired “The digital Michelangelo project” (Levoy et al.,
2000), around which this report is centered. If we make the
analogy that the mentioned paper is the very trunk of a tree,
this report aims to uncover both the roots which made the
trunk possible as well as the leaves which have originated
from the trunk, respectively.

Roots: The ideas that have most inﬂuenced the digital
Michelangelo project work (Levoy et al., 2000) cover so-
lutions and approaches to various problems that naturally
arose in the course of the project. A visualization of the
main ideas that inﬂuenced the digital Michelangelo project
paper is depicted in Fig. 2a based on the literature cited in
the paper.

Starting out with scanning large marble statues, object
models had to be created from multiple views (Beraldin
et al., 1997). To ensure a realistic rendering later on, high
quality textures had to be synthesized (Bernardini et al.,
2000). Likewise, new techniques were developed to regis-
ter data as points and work with these new data structures
(Johnson & Hebert, 1997; Rusinkiewicz & Levoy, 2000).
Other interesting hurdles to overcome were dealing with
large amounts of data (Pulli, 1999) and planning how to ac-
quire data intelligently (Maver & Bajcsy, 1993; Pito, 1996).

Additionally, very speciﬁc real-world challenges had to be
overcome such as the modeling of weathered stone (Dorsey
et al., 2006) and camera calibration (Heikkila & Silven,
1997).

As we will lay out in the remainder of this report, many of
these problems and their initial solutions provided a fertile
ground for exciting new research directions.

4. Leaves of the paper

Branching off from the digital Michelangelo project (Levoy
et al., 2000), a variety of interesting research directions
emerged.

Inspiring Computer Vision System Solutions (ICVSS)

(a)

(b)

Figure 2. Visualization of abstract themes present in the roots and leaves of provided paper. Subﬁgure a) showcases the main themes of
the papers cited in the seminal work (Levoy et al., 2000) which this report starts out with. Subﬁgure b) highlights the abstract themes
and titles of most of the papers citing the mentioned seminal work. Illustrations were created using VOSViewer (Van Eck & Waltman,
2010). (Best viewed in color)

Point-based computer graphics: As one of the early
works, the digital Michelangelo project pioneered the us-
age of point clouds to align acquired scans. Since then,
an active research community has developed that has im-
proved upon many of the original techniques such as a more
recent work on 3D point-based image fusion (Keller et al.,
2013).

Large scale data acquisition and processing: Acquiring
high-quality data oftentimes sets the stage to overcome dif-
ﬁcult challenges in computer vision and other disciplines.
In this spirit, they clearly demonstrated the ability to both
acquire and compute a large amount of data. Similarly, the
published data of the scanned statues enabled many future
works. This has set a positive example for later datasets
published in the ﬁeld, e.g. (Scharstein et al., 2014).

Demonstrating the feasibility of difﬁcult vision projects:
Lastly, we would like to make the point that by overcom-
ing the many challenges associated with such a demand-
ing project, similar moon-shot endeavors are encouraged.
Likewise, the challenging task they attacked in the year
2000 has since been partially re-addressed with more ad-
vanced methods and/or less specialized sensors as shown
in (Pradeep et al., 2013).

Figure 2b illustrates the main ideas of works citing the dis-
cussed digital Michelangelo project. It is interesting to note
that the keywords "Cloud", "Descriptor" and "Tomogra-
phy" appear prominently in these works. This serves to
illustrate the previous argument that many different types
of works have a connection and are at least partially made
possible by the discussed paper.

Finally, there is also a lot of engineering value to this one-
of-a-kind project, overcoming issues unique to the domain
and precision level of its task. Particularly laudable were
the proper documentation of solutions at detail level which
allows for result reproduction and the upfront mentioning
of difﬁculties and issues.

5. Discussion

Taking the digital Michelangelo project as a successful ex-
ample of a large-scale computer vision project, we would
like to extract some key insights that can potentially aid us
in conducting similarly successful large-scale projects in
the future.

We hypothesize that the work in the referenced project was
only achievable in this form as research conducted within
academia and that a similar effort may be less likely to oc-
cur in industry. Academia provides several conditions that
are highly conducive to work on challenging projects such
as this one (Levoy et al., 2000), which do not directly trans-
late into ﬁnancial returns in the future. On the other hand,
large-scale research projects in industry may also have a
similar impact if ﬁnancial rewards can be expected upon
their successful completion.

From the authors’ perspective, large endeavors such as the
Michelangelo project (Levoy et al., 2000), have the poten-
tial to move the ﬁeld of computer vision forward, as well as
to motivate researchers from diverse ﬁelds to work on prob-
lems that may contribute to future breakthroughs. We pose
the hypothesis that the productive struggle exempliﬁed by

Inspiring Computer Vision System Solutions (ICVSS)

6. Conclusion

Comprehensive, interdisciplinary ﬁeld research has pushed
the envelope of what is possible in computer vision and
improved the state of the art for many problems. The rami-
ﬁcations of such projects not only open new possibilities of
research, but often also bring new technologies to society.

The "digital Michelangelo project" presented a richly de-
tailed effort towards a solution to the problem of digital-
ization under certain constraints. It had a large impact on
many ﬁelds of research, and important lessons can be dis-
tilled from it and it may be regarded as an archetype of
productive struggle in science.

Acknowledgements: We are very grateful to Stefano
Soatto who initiated the organization of the group work of
which this report is a result.

References

Antol, Stanislaw, Agrawal, Aishwarya, Lu,

Jiasen,
Mitchell, Margaret, Batra, Dhruv, Zitnick, C. Lawrence,
and Parikh, Devi. Vqa: Visual question answering. In
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
2015.

Beraldin, J-A, Cournoyer, Luc, Rioux, Marc, Blais,
François, El-Hakim, Sabry F, and Godin, Guy. Object
model creation from multiple range images: acquisition,
calibration, model building and veriﬁcation. In 3-D Dig-
ital Imaging and Modeling, 1997. Proceedings., Interna-
tional Conference on Recent Advances in, pp. 326–333.
IEEE, 1997.

Bernardini, Fausto, Martin, Ioana M, and Rushmeier,
Holly E. High-quality texture synthesis from multiple
scans. IBM TJ Watson Research Center, 2000.

Chang, Chein-I. Hyperspectral imaging: techniques for
spectral detection and classiﬁcation, volume 1. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2003.

Dorsey, Julie, Edelman, Alan, Jensen, Henrik Wann,
Legakis, Justin, and Pedersen, Hans Kohling. Modeling
and rendering of weathered stone. In ACM SIGGRAPH
2006 Courses, pp. 4. ACM, 2006.

Heikkila, Janne and Silven, Olli. A four-step camera cal-
In
ibration procedure with implicit image correction.
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1997. Pro-
ceedings., 1997 IEEE Computer Society Conference on,
pp. 1106–1112. IEEE, 1997.

Figure 3. Award ceremony of reading group participants with the
organizer and creator of the reading group competition, Professor
Stefano Soatto (right).

the "digital Michelangelo project" can be described by the
theory of "Productive Failure" (Kapur, 2008). We believe
that similar large scale projects may, in the same way, lead
to leaps in what will be possible in the future. To this end,
we brieﬂy discuss three topics which have the potential of
making a profound impact:

• Autonomous driving: Perception for self-driving
cars is naturally associated with intriguing challenges
within the context of computer vision. Reliable, accu-
rate scene "understanding" with useful representations
for action are of utmost importance in this context.

• Virtual and augmented reality: Creating computer
generated experiences is associated with other types
of research opportunities. Virtual and augmented re-
ality environments require a very realistic or appeal-
ing visualization mechanism. Likewise, interactivity
in such settings will be a key component in the fu-
ture. A moon-shot project proposed in this area is the
idea of "digital human teleportation" with early results
shown in (Saito et al., 2016).

• Bridging the gap between vision and other data
modalities: In the recent past, such techniques have
migrated to other disciplines and problem settings. A
recent well-known case for successful interaction be-
tween different modalities is the Visual Question An-
swering task (Antol et al., 2015) which combines tex-
tual and visual information.

Again, all three of the mentioned aspiring goals for the ﬁeld
share the characteristic of being practical and being a step-
ping stone to several unsolved research questions.

Johnson, Andrew Edie and Hebert, Martial. Surface reg-
In 3-D Digi-
istration by matching oriented points.
tal Imaging and Modeling, 1997. Proceedings., Interna-

Inspiring Computer Vision System Solutions (ICVSS)

Saito, Shunsuke, Wei, Lingyu, Hu, Liwen, Nagano, Koki,
and Li, Hao. Photorealistic facial texture inference using
deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.00523,
2016.

Scharstein, Daniel, Hirschmüller, Heiko, Kitajima, York,
Krathwohl, Greg, Neši´c, Nera, Wang, Xi, and Westling,
Porter. High-resolution stereo datasets with subpixel-
accurate ground truth. In German Conference on Pattern
Recognition, pp. 31–42. Springer, 2014.

Schwarz, Brent. Lidar: Mapping the world in 3d. Nature

Photonics, 4(7):429–430, 2010.

Van Eck, Nees Jan and Waltman, Ludo. Software survey:
Vosviewer, a computer program for bibliometric map-
ping. Scientometrics, 84(2):523–538, 2010.

tional Conference on Recent Advances in, pp. 121–128.
IEEE, 1997.

Kapur, Manu. Productive failure. Cognition and instruc-

tion, 26(3):379–424, 2008.

Keller, Maik, Leﬂoch, Damien, Lambers, Martin, Izadi,
Shahram, Weyrich, Tim, and Kolb, Andreas. Real-time
3d reconstruction in dynamic scenes using point-based
In 3DTV-Conference, 2013 International Con-
fusion.
ference on, pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2013.

Levoy, Marc, Pulli, Kari, Curless, Brian, Rusinkiewicz,
Szymon, Koller, David, Pereira, Lucas, Ginzton, Matt,
Anderson, Sean, Davis, James, Ginsberg, Jeremy, et al.
The digital michelangelo project: 3d scanning of large
statues. In Proceedings of the 27th annual conference on
Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 131–
144. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 2000.

Lichtsteiner, Patrick, Posch, Christoph, and Delbruck,
Tobi. A 128 x 128 120 db 15 micro seconds latency asyn-
chronous temporal contrast vision sensor. IEEE journal
of solid-state circuits, 43(2):566–576, 2008.

Maver, Jasna and Bajcsy, Ruzena. Occlusions as a guide
for planning the next view. IEEE transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence, 15(5):417–433, 1993.

Ng, Ren, Levoy, Marc, Brédif, Mathieu, Duval, Gene,
Horowitz, Mark, and Hanrahan, Pat. Light ﬁeld pho-
tography with a hand-held plenoptic camera. Computer
Science Technical Report CSTR, 2(11):1–11, 2005.

Pito, Richard. A sensor-based solution to the" next best
view" problem. In Pattern Recognition, 1996., Proceed-
ings of the 13th International Conference on, volume 1,
pp. 941–945. IEEE, 1996.

Pradeep, Vivek, Rhemann, Christoph, Izadi, Shahram,
Zach, Christopher, Bleyer, Michael, and Bathiche,
Steven. Monofusion: Real-time 3d reconstruction of
In Mixed and
small scenes with a single web camera.
Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2013 IEEE International
Symposium on, pp. 83–88. IEEE, 2013.

Pulli, Kari. Multiview registration for large data sets.
In 3-D Digital Imaging and Modeling, 1999. Proceed-
ings. Second International Conference on, pp. 160–168.
IEEE, 1999.

Rusinkiewicz, Szymon and Levoy, Marc. Qsplat: A mul-
tiresolution point rendering system for large meshes. In
Proceedings of the 27th annual conference on Computer
graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 343–352. ACM
Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 2000.

