Spatial-Scale Aligned Network for Fine-Grained Recognition

Lizhao Gao1, Haihua Xu2, Chong Sun1, Junling Liu3, and Yu-Wing Tai1

1Tencent, {leonardgao, waynecsun, yuwingtai}@tencent.com
2Megvii, xuhaihua@megvii.com
3Peking University, liujunling@pku.edu.cn

0
2
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
2
1
0
.
1
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Existing approaches for ﬁne-grained visual recognition
focus on learning marginal region-based representations
while neglecting the spatial and scale misalignments, lead-
ing to inferior performance. In this paper, we propose the
spatial-scale aligned network (SSANET) and implicitly ad-
dress misalignments during the recognition process. Es-
pecially, SSANET consists of 1) a self-supervised proposal
mining formula with Morphological Alignment Constraints;
2) a discriminative scale mining (DSM) module, which ex-
ploits the feature pyramid via a circulant matrix, and pro-
vides the Fourier solver for fast scale alignments; 3) an
oriented pooling (OP) module, that performs the pooling
operation in several pre-deﬁned orientations. Each orien-
tation deﬁnes one kind of spatial alignment, and the net-
work automatically determines which is the optimal align-
ments through learning. With the proposed two modules,
our algorithm can automatically determine the accurate lo-
cal proposal regions and generate more robust target rep-
resentations being invariant to various appearance vari-
ances. Extensive experiments verify that SSANET is com-
petent at learning better spatial-scale invariant target rep-
resentations, yielding the superior performance on the ﬁne-
grained recognition task on several benchmarks.

1. Introduction

Recognizing the ﬁne-grained categories such as wild
bird species [18], automobile models [10], is of great need
in daily life. The relevant technologies have alreay been ap-
plied in many internet products severing millions of users.
However, it is still a challenging task up to date for the in-
herent difﬁculties that the intra-class variance is sometimes
larger than the inter-class one, which can be attributed to
large pose, viewpoint and background changes. It needs to
extract the subtle visual details within subordinate classes

under drastic appearance changes. Hence the majority of
efforts in the ﬁne-grained community center on how to
take full advantages of discriminative part localizations to
learn marginal representations. Some previous works (both
the traditional methods [6, 20] and CNN based methods
[13, 22, 23]) usually contain two steps: 1) object part lo-
calization by extra annotations; 2) feature extraction via the
localized part region. A main limitation for such methods is
that they need large amounts of annotations for the part re-
gions, which are not easy to be obtained though the existing
computer vision algorithms. As a result, detection-based
methods and attention methods [24, 17, 4, 25, 21, 15] have
been the focus of researches, as they no longer need extra
part annotations. These works try to learn a diverse col-
lection of discriminative parts in an unsupervised manner
through end-to-end model learning. The learned part re-
gions supplies complementary but vital information lost by
the backbones throughout a chapter of pooling operations.
Recently, there are two different pathways of part-based
methods in general. One pathway is to use soft attention
mechanisms, e.g., MACNN [24] utilizes a channel attention
module to distinguish different parts and then jointly con-
sider the recognition results from different parts for more
robust estimation. Another way is to use ”hard” attention,
namely selecting appropriate anchors or sub-windows to
highlight the local regions with semantic importance.

Despite achieving promising progress, there are several
critical issues left unsolved: 1) owing to the lack of anno-
tations, both the attention-based and anchor-based methods
fail to regress the accurate semantically informative regions
(e.g., head of a bird); 2) the targets to be recognized have di-
verse poses, rotations, viewpoints causing large intra-class
variance. Previous methods like [9, 22, 13, 7] focus on
addressing certain misalignment using complicated design
while failing to cover all the conditions.

To address the above challenges, we propose the
SSANET, which focuses on learning accurate region pro-
posals as well as robust target representations being robust

1

