Bootstrapping a Hybrid MT System to a New Language Pair

Jo˜ao Rodrigues, Nuno Rendeiro, Andreia Querido, Sanja ˇStajner, Ant´onio Branco
Department of Informatics, Faculty of Sciences
University of Lisbon, Portugal
{joao.rodrigues, nuno.rendeiro, andreia.querido, stajner.sanja, antonio.branco}@di.fc.ul.pt

Abstract
The usual concern when opting for a rule-based or a hybrid machine translation (MT) system is how much effort is required to adapt the
system to a different language pair or a new domain. In this paper, we describe a way of adapting an existing hybrid MT system to a
new language pair, and show that such a system can outperform a standard phrase-based statistical machine translation system with an
average of 10 persons/month of work. This is speciﬁcally important in the case of domain-speciﬁc MT for which there is not enough
parallel data for training a statistical machine translation system.

Keywords: Hybrid Machine Translation, Tecto MT, Portuguese Synthesis

the Maximum Entropy context-sensitive translation models
(Mareˇcek et al., 2010). The analysis phase (which converts
the input sentence into the a-layer and then the t-layer) and
the synthesis phase (which converts the translated t-layer
representation to the a-layer and then to the output surface
string) are mostly rule-based. They use a modular structure,
allowing for its components to be inherited, and adapted,
for different languages.

1.

Introduction

Phrase-based statistical machine translation (PBSMT) is
considered as state-of-the-art MT approach whenever suf-
ﬁciently large parallel (or comparable) datasets for training
are available. However, for many language pairs and trans-
lation directions (English to Portuguese among them) large
training datasets only exists for few domains, such as par-
liamentary discussions (Europarl (Koehn, 2005)) or legal
documents (JRC-Acquis corpus (Steinberger et al., 2006)).
In such cases, it is assumed that a rule-based or a hybrid
MT system lead to better results as it can better overcome
the data sparsity and generalise over the unseen word forms
(especially useful in the case of morphologically rich lan-
guages). The main concern is, however, that adaptation of
a rule-based or a hybrid MT system (its rules) to a new lan-
guage pair or a new domain may require considerable time
and effort.
In this paper, we focus on a hybrid MT system (TectoMT
(Popel and ˇZabokrtsk`y, 2010)) and show that the adap-
tation of the existing TectoMT system for English-Czech
language pair to a new language pair (English to Por-
tuguese translation) can be done with an average of 10 per-
sons/month of work time and outperform the standard PB-
SMT system on a domain-speciﬁc MT task.
In the next section (Section 2.), we brieﬂy describe the ar-
chitecture of the TectoMT system and its main components.
Section 3. describes how we adapted from the English syn-
thesis to the required Portuguese synthesis. In Section 4.
we present the results of the automatic evaluation of our En-
glish to Portuguese TectoMT system and discussion. Sec-
tion 5. contains closing remarks and directions for future
work.

2. Related Work
TectoMT is a modular, machine translation system (Popel
and ˇZabokrtsk`y, 2010), based on the Prague tectogrammat-
ics theory of Sgall (Sgall et al., 1986). It uses two layers of
structural description, the shallow a-layer (syntactic analy-
sis) and the deep t-layer (Figure 1).
The tree-to-tree transfer ( ˇZabokrtsk´y et al., 2008) is per-
formed on the deep t-layer (tectogramatical layer) by using

Figure 1: TectoMT architecture.

The English-Czech TectoMT system achieved very good
results on the Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
2013 shared task (Bojar et al., 2013). Those results, to-
gether with the widespread concerns that the state-of-the-
art PBSMT may be reaching a performance ceiling, make
us believe that the use of the linguistically rich MT ap-
proaches, such as TectoMT, could be a good way forward
towards higher quality MT.
In order to adapt the English-Czech TectoMT to a new
language pair, it is only necessary to adapt the synthesis
phase of the original system and train a transfer model (han-
dled by the tree-to-tree maximum entropy translation model
(Mareˇcek et al., 2010)) which takes around two weeks to
train over the whole Europarl corpus.
The blocks for English analysis and synthesis phases can
be inherited from the English-Czech system (Popel and

2762

ˇZabokrtsk`y, 2010) directly.

3. Adaptation of the Synthesis Phase

As a modular framework, TectoMT contains the different
components separated into blocks (of Perl code) that are
triggered at each stage of the processing pipeline.
The synthesis stage starts by converting the result of the
transfer stage, represented as a t-tree, into an a-tree. In the
last step/block of the synthesis stage, the a-tree nodes are
converted to surface forms.
Unlike the a-tree, the t-tree does not contain nodes which
represent functional words, such as prepositions or con-
junctions. The information about auxiliary words is instead
preserved in a form of an attribute to a node, or in the re-
lations between the nodes. The t-tree uses the lemma to
express the lexical meaning of the node and the formeme to
help separating the lexical from the syntactic information.
For example, the formeme of the semantic noun in a subject
position is represented as n:sub. For the morphological cat-
egories the grammateme tectogrammatical representation is
used ( ˇZabokrtsk´y et al., 2008).
For the Portuguese synthesis adaptation, the process be-
gun by adapting the existing English blocks (Popel and
ˇZabokrtsk`y, 2010), with the corresponding Portuguese lin-
guistic phenomena. The next step was to create new blocks
for Portuguese-speciﬁc phenomena.
We resorted to the existing tools developed by (Branco and
Silva, 2006) whenever possible, due to the higher accuracy
over the available tools within the original TectoMT sys-
tem. For verbal conjugation and for nominal inﬂection, we
used the LX-Conjugator and LX-Inﬂector to generate sur-
face forms (described in more details in Section 3.1.). We
created new TectoMT blocks to call and incorporate these
tools into the TectoMT pipeline.
The English to Portuguese TectoMT system was being im-
proved iteratively, controlling for the BLEU score and hu-
man error analysis of 1,000 sentences in each step. The
set of 1,000 sentences (QTLEAP-IT1) was compiled un-
der the QTLeap project by collecting the sentences from a
real-usage scenario where a user chats with the Information
Technology (IT) support and translating them by profes-
sional translators. After each iteration (adding of new syn-
thesis blocks), we checked the BLEU score and performed
a human error analysis by two linguists, native speakers
of Portuguese. The linguists were analyzing the most fre-
quently missing n-grams (up to three-grams) and the t-trees
at the starting point of the synthesis phase, and suggesting
rules which would enforce better synthesis (transformation
of t-trees to the surface form).

3.1. Portuguese-Speciﬁc Synthesis Blocks

In this subsection, we describe the blocks used for the syn-
thesis pipeline for Portuguese (the names of the blocks are
presented in bold).

3.1.1. Add Blocks

AddAuxVerbCompoundPassive adds the Portuguese aux-
iliary verb ser to a passive verb and creates a child node

before the current node, setting as default the third person
in the indicative.
AddConditional creates an auxiliary node for the Por-
tuguese conditional conjunction se. These situations are
present when the corresponding t-node functor (semantic
values of syntactic dependency relations which express the
functions of individual modiﬁcations in the sentence) is a
conditional. The new auxiliary node is placed preceding
the reference node.
AddArticles adds articles as child nodes of the noun nodes
according to their deﬁniteness grammatemes, and person
and gender (information about person and gender is con-
tained in the Interset).
AddAuxVerbModalTense adds an auxiliary expression for
combined modality and tense according to the verbal mood
(indicative, imperative or conditional), the tense (simul-
taneous, preceding or subsequent event) and the deontic
modality.
AddVerbNegation creates the particle corresponding to
the negation of the negated verb.
AddPrepos adds the prepositional nodes. In Portuguese,
the adverbs are also included as a possible prepositional
formation.
AddSubconjs adds the subordinating conjunctions.
AddCoordPunct handles the commas in the coordinations.
AddComparatives adds the nodes for the comparative de-
gree (mais).
AddParentheses adds the parenthesis according to the t-
nodes attribute (is parenthesis).
AddSentFinalPunct adds the end-of-sentence punctuation
mark.

3.1.2. Remove Blocks

DropSubjPersProns removes the nodes that identify the
personal pronouns (#PersPron).
DropPersPronSb deletes personal pronouns in subject po-
sition (in pro-drop languages such as Portuguese).
DeleteSuperﬂuousAuxCP deletes
nodes
superﬂuous
which may appear by default in some combinations of
prepositions or subordinate conjunctions. For example, it
replaces “for X and for Y” with “for X and Y”.

3.1.3. Reorder Blocks

MoveRhematizers shifts rhematizers before articles and
prepositions. Rhematizers are expressions whose function
is to signal the topic-focus articulation categories in the sen-
tence.

3.1.4. Repair Blocks

ImposeLemma ﬁxes erroneous lemmas produced during
the transfer phase (a few lemmas were repeatedly wrongly
selected during the transfer phase and for those cases, the
suggested rules impose the choice of the correct lemma).
ImposeFormeme ﬁxes some of the errors in formemes. If
the lemma does not correspond to the correct formeme, the
block will search for the closest lemma with the correct
part-of-speech. In some speciﬁc lemmas, for example, this
block forces the use of the Portuguese proposition de, and

2763

checks in every following child node (in the sentence order)
for a formeme which is a verb and adds the preposition.
FixPossessivePronouns ﬁxes the inﬂection of possessive
pronouns, e.g. seu, teu and meu.

3.1.5. Agreement Blocks

AddGender sets the gender for every noun and adjective
a-node. It resorts to the LX-Suite tagger, passes the form,
lemma, part-of-speech tags and other attributes to the tag-
ger and returns the best gender.
ImposeSubjpredAgr sets the gender, number and person
of verbs according to their subjects. In Portuguese, verbs
have no gender but a noun-complement is needed for the
gender concordance.
ImposeAttrAgr sets the gender, number and person ac-
cording to their governing nouns.
SecondPersonPoliteness sets politeness person for Por-
tuguese (third person). This occurs when the lemma is
represented as a PersPron (all personal and possessive pro-
nouns, including reﬂexive pronouns) and the corresponding
t-node is in the second person.

3.1.6.

Inﬂect Blocks

GenerateWordforms generates the corresponding word
forms for each lemma by using the LX-Conjugator for the
verb nodes and the LX-Inﬂector for the adjective and nouns
nodes. This block also uses the Interset (Zeman, 2008) part-
of-speech, number, mood, tense, person and lemma. This
block also handles the inﬂection for the superlative degree.
GeneratePronouns generates pronouns by using the
formeme and the Interset person, gender and number. This
block also handles the possessive, dative, accusative and
oblique case pronouns.

3.1.7. Other Blocks

CopyTtree performs a deep-copy of the current transfer t-
trees into an a-tree.
CliticExceptions handles the clitics in Portuguese.
MarkSubject ﬁlls the Afun label (analytical functions
which correspond to syntactic functions such as subject,
predicate, object and attribute) with the Sb attribute mark-
ing a subject. The values are read from the formeme. For
Portuguese, if the formeme is a possessive noun or a noun
marked as a subject, then the Afun will get the Sb value.
InitMorphcat ﬁlls the Interset (Zeman, 2008) morphologi-
cal categories based on the corresponding grammateme and
formeme. It also takes into account the morphological val-
ues for the gender, number and person in the case of a pos-
sessive pronoun.
ProjectClauseNumber sets the number of the clause for
the ﬁnite verb clauses.
PrepositionContraction handles preposition contractions
in Portuguese.
CapitalizeSentStart capitalises the ﬁrst letter of the ﬁrst
(non-punctuation) token in the sentence.
ConcatenateTokens creates the ﬁnal sentence as a concate-
nation of the a-nodes.

An example of the a-trees and t-trees is given in the Fig-
ure 2. This example also illustrates the use of AddGen-
der and AddPrepos blocks. From the AddGender block the
node ’imagem’ gets the tag ’fem’ which will make possible
to the block AddPrepos to add the preposition ’a’.

4. Evaluation and Error Analysis
In this section, we report on the automatic evaluation of the
full translation pipeline (which contains analysis, transfer
and synthesis phases) for the translation from English to
Portuguese, and discuss the ﬁndings of the conducted error
analysis.
As the test corpus, we use 1, 000 parallel sentences from the
IT domain (QTLEAP-IT2), compiled under the QTLeap
project in a similar way as the 1, 000 parallel sentences
used for the development of the synthesis phase (none of
the 1, 000 test sentences can be found among the 1, 000
sentences used for development).
For the automatic evaluation, we use the BLEU score (Pa-
pineni et al., 2002) and compare our TectoMT system
with the standard phrase-based SMT system built using the
Moses toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007). Both systems were
trained over the full Europarl corpus (Koehn, 2005), con-
sisting of 1,960,407 sentence pairs. The PBSMT was tuned
using the QTLEAP-IT1 dataset (the same dataset which
was used for the development of the rules for the synthe-
sis phase of the TectoMT system).
As can be seen from the results presented in Table 1, our
adaptation of TectoMT system to EN→PT translation task
signiﬁcantly outperforms the standard PBSMT system on
the IT test set (the difference is statistically signiﬁcant at a
0.05 level of signiﬁcance, using the paired bootstrap resam-
pling (Koehn, 2004)).
Comparing to other languages pairs translation (Rosa et al.,
2015) using TectoMT, the translation from English to Por-
tuguese falls within the same range of score values.

System
PBSMT
TectoMT

EN→PT
0.1899
0.2254

Table 1: Comparison of BLEU scores

5. Conclusions
We have presented an English→Portuguese hybrid deep
MT system (TectoMT) which has been adapted from the
existing English-Czech TectoMT system. Due to the Tec-
toMT system having highly modular structure, the adapta-
tion of the system to a new language pair only required the
adaptation of the synthesis phase (blocks of Perl code) and
the training of the transfer models. Both tasks required a
total effort of 10 persons/month.
Some of the blocks were inherited from already existing
synthesis blocks and modiﬁed to Portuguese, the others
were written especially for the EN→PT system in order to
cover the linguistic phenomena which are speciﬁc for Por-
tuguese. In this paper, we described this process in details,
additionally showing that it is possible to integrate the ex-
isting language tools (state-of-the-art tools for each speciﬁc
language) in the TectoMT pipeline.

2764

Figure 2: An example of a-trees and t-trees (EN: “Select the image and then adjust with the arrow keys.” → PT: “Seleciona
a imagem e depois ajusta com as teclas de seta.”)

Our TectoMT system adapted to the EN→PT translation
task (full system consisting of analysis, transfer, and syn-
thesis phases) signiﬁcantly outperformed the standard PB-
SMT system for a domain-speciﬁc translation task. These
results showed that TectoMT is a promising machine trans-
lation system which can easily be adapted to a new lan-
guage pair and obtain the results comparable to the standard
PBSMT systems.

Acknowledgements
This work has received support by the EC’s FP7 (FP7/2007-
2013) under grant agreement number 610516: “QTLeap:
Quality Translation by Deep Language Engineering Ap-
proaches”.

6. Bibliographical References
Bojar, O., Buck, C., Callison-Burch, C., Federmann, C.,
Haddow, B., Koehn, P., Monz, C., Post, M., Soricut, R.,
and Specia, L. (2013). Findings of the 2013 workshop
on statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
8th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
1–44.

Branco, A. and Silva, J. R. (2006). A suite of shallow pro-
cessing tools for portuguese: Lx-suite. In Proceedings of
the Eleventh Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Posters &
Demonstrations, pages 179–182. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch, C., Fed-
erico, M., Bertoldi, N., Cowan, B., Shen, W., Moran,
C., Zens, R., Dyer, C. J., Bojar, O., Constantin, A., and
Herbst, E. (2007). Moses: Open source toolkit for sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics Companion Volume Proceedings of the Demo
and Poster Sessions, pages 177–180.

Koehn, P. (2004). Statistical signiﬁcance tests for machine
translation evaluation. In Proceedings of the Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Koehn, P. (2005). Europarl: A parallel corpus for statisti-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of the Tenth Ma-
chine Translation Summit, pages 79–86.

Mareˇcek, D., Popel, M., and ˇZabokrtsk´y, Z. (2010). Max-
imum entropy translation model in dependency-based
MT framework. In Proceedings of the Joint 5th Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation and Metrics-
MATR, pages 201–206.

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. (2002).
BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. In Proceedings of ACL.

Popel, M. and ˇZabokrtsk`y, Z. (2010). Tectomt: modular
nlp framework. In Advances in natural language pro-
cessing, pages 293–304. Springer.

Rosa, R., Duˇsek, O., Nov´ak, M., and Popel, M. (2015).
Translation model interpolation for domain adaptation
in tectomt. In 1st Deep Machine Translation Workshop,
page 89.

Sgall, P., Hajicov´a, E., and Panevov´a, J. (1986). The mean-
ing of the sentence in its semantic and pragmatic aspects.
Springer Science & Business Media.

Steinberger, R., Pouliquen, B., Widiger, A., Ignat, C., Er-
javec, T., Tuﬁs, D., and Varga, D.
(2006). The jrc-
acquis: A multilingual aligned parallel corpus with 20+
languages. arXiv preprint cs/0609058.

ˇZabokrtsk´y, Z., Pt´aˇcek, J., and Pajas, P. (2008). TectoMT:
Highly modular MT system with tectogrammatics used
as transfer layer. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 167–170.
Zeman, D. (2008). Reusable tagset conversion using tagset

drivers. In LREC.

2765

