Which annotation scheme is more expedient to measure syntactic diffi-
culty and cognitive demand? 
 

Jianwei Yan 
Department of Linguistics 
Zhejiang University, China 
jwyan@zju.edu.cn 

Haitao Liu 
Department of Linguistics 
Zhejiang University, China 
lhtzju@gmail.com 

Abstract 

This paper investigates which annotation scheme of dependency treebank is more congruent for 
the measurement of syntactic complexity and cognitive constraint of language materials. Two 
representatives of semantic- and syntactic-oriented annotation schemes, the Universal Depend-
encies (UD) and the  Surface-Syntactic Universal Dependencies (SUD), are under discussion. 
The results show that, on the one hand, natural languages based on both annotation schemes 
follow the universal linguistic law of Dependency Distance Minimization (DDM); on the other 
hand,  according  to  the  metric  of  Mean  Dependency  Distances  (MDDs),  the  SUD  annotation 
scheme that accords with traditional dependency syntaxes are more expedient to measure syn-
tactic difficulty and cognitive demand.  

1  Background and Motivation 

Dependency grammar deals with the syntactically related words, i.e. the governor and the dependent, 
within sentence structure (Heringer, 1993; Hudson, 1995; Liu, 2009). It can be dated back to the seminal 
work of Eléments de Syntaxe Structurale by Tesnière (1959), and developed through different theories, 
including  Word  Grammar,  Meaning-Text-Theory,  Lexicase,  etc.  (e.g.  Hudson,1984;  Mel’čuk,  1988; 
Starosta, 1988; Eroms, 2000). Thus far, there are many representations of dependency grammar.  Figure 
1 displays two typical dependency representations of one sample sentence We walked along the lake.  

Figure 1. Dependency Representations of One English Sentence We walked along the lake Based on 
UD and SUD Annotation Schemes. 

 
The dependency representation based on the Universal Dependencies (UD1), as shown in Figure 1 (a), 
is one of the most eminent models by now under the framework of dependency grammar. It attempts at 
establishing a multilingual morphosyntactic scheme to annotate various languages in a consistent man-
ner (Nivre, 2015; Osborne and Gerdes, 2019). Thus, the UD annotation scheme holds a semantic over 

 

                                                                                 
1See also http://universaldependencies.org/. 
 

syntactic  criteria  to  put  priorities  to  content  words to  maximize  “crosslinguistic  parallelism”  (Nivre, 
2015; de Marneffe and Nivre, 2019). On the contrary, the Surface-Syntactic Universal Dependencies 
(SUD2) annotation scheme, as shown in Figure 1 (b), follows the syntactic criteria to define not only 
the dependency labels but also the dependency links. It aims to make the annotation scheme close to the 
dependency traditions, like Meaning-Text-Theory (MTT) (Mel’čuk, 1988), Word Grammar (Hudson, 
1984), etc. Hence, the SUD annotation scheme is a syntactic-oriented dependency representation that 
seeks to promote the syntactic motivations (Gerdes et al., 2018; Osborne and Gerdes, 2019). Therefore, 
the UD and SUD annotation schemes signify two typical preferences of dependency grammar, one is 
semantic-oriented, and the other is syntactic-oriented.  

As shown in Figure 1, the linear sentence in both representations can be divided into several words; 
and the labelled arcs, directed from the governors to the dependents,  represent different dependency 
types indicating the syntactic relations between elements within the sentence. Hence, the dependency 
representations indicate both the functional role of each word as well as the syntactic relations between 
different  elements.  More  importantly,  based  on  dependency  representations,  linguists  have  proposed 
several measurements for linguistic analysis. For one thing, dependency distance is defined as the lin-
ear  distance  of the  governor  and the  dependent  (Hudson,  1995).  For  another, the  linear  order  of  the 
governor and the dependent of each dependency type is referred to as dependency direction (Liu, 2010). 
When a governor appears before a dependent, the dependency direction is governor-initial or negative. 
Otherwise, it is governor-final or positive. For instance, in Figure 1 (a), the arc above the dependent we 
and the governor walked forms a governor-final relation; and the dependency distance between these 
two elements is 2 – 1 = 1 (the number 2 and 1 in the subtraction represent the linear order of the governor 
and dependent, respectively). Detailed calculating method will be shown in Section 2. Therefore, the 
dependency representations and the measures of dependency relations are both explicit and clear-cut. 
This explains the reason why dependency treebanks, i.e. corpora with annotations (Abeillé, 2003), are 
widespread among linguists in big-data era. As a result, the variations and universals of human languages 
are explored and unveiled through statistical and mathematical tools (Hudson, 1995; Liu et al., 2017). 
What is noteworthy is that previous studies have shown that dependency distance is an important indi-
cator in demonstrating the notion of syntactic complexity and cognitive demand (Hudson, 1995; Gibson, 
2000; Liu, 2008).  

Under the framework of dependency grammar, Hudson (1995) characterized the definition of depend-
ency distance based on the theories of memory decaying and short-term memory (e.g. Brown, 1958; 
Levy  et  al.,  2013). The  notion  of  syntactic  difficulty  and  cognitive  demand  have  been  subsequently 
related to the linear distance between the governors and the dependents in cognitive science (Gibson, 
1998; Hawkins, 2004). Based on a Romanian dependency treebank, Ferrer-i-Cancho (2004) hypothe-
sized and proved that the mean distance of a sentence is minimized and constrained. These paved the 
way for Liu’s (2008) empirical study on dependency distance which provides a viable treebank-based 
approach towards the metric of syntactic complexity and cognitive constraint. Afterwards, series of stud-
ies  exploring  the  relationship  between  dependency  distance and  syntactic  and  cognitive  benchmarks 
have been conducted (e.g. Jiang and Liu, 2015; Wang and Liu, 2017; Liu et al., 2017). These studies 
share  some  similarities.  First,  it  is  well-corroborated  that  the  frequency  of  dependency  distance  de-
creases with the increase of the dependency distance, viz., the distribution of dependency distance fol-
lows  the  linguistic  law  of  the  Least  Effort  Principle  (LEP)  or  Dependency  Distance  Minimization 
(DDM) (Zipf, 1965; Liu et al., 2017). Second, it is believed that the greater the dependency distance is, 
the more difficult the sentence structure (Gibson, 1998; Hiranuma, 1999; Liu et al., 2017). Thus, the 
arithmetic average of all dependency distances of one sentence or a treebank or the mean dependency 
distances (MDDs) (Liu, 2008) has been an important index of memory burden, demonstrating the syn-
tactic complexity and cognitive demand of the language concerned (Hudson, 1995; Liu et al., 2017).  

Previous studies have shown that there are several factors that have effects on the measurement of 
dependency distance of a sentence, including sentence length, genre, chunking, language type, grammar, 
annotation scheme and so forth (e.g. Jiang and Liu, 2015; Wang and Liu, 2017; Lu et al., 2016; Hiran-
uma,  1999;  Liu  and Xu,  2012;  Gildea and Temperley,  2010).  Most  of  these factors  have  been  well-
investigated, however, the factor of annotation scheme has rarely been studied. Liu et al. (2009), for 
instance,  investigated  Chinese  syntactic  and  typological  properties  based  on  five  different  Chinese 

                                                                                 
2See also https://gitlab.inria.fr/grew/SUD. 

treebanks with different genres and annotation schemes, yet the treebanks adopted with different anno-
tation schemes  were used  to  avoid the corpus influences to  ensure  a  reliable  conclusion.  Hence,  the 
question as to the effects of annotation scheme on the distribution of dependency distance and MDD 
remains open.  

Moreover, investigations into  the benchmark of syntactic  complexity and cognitive demand intro-
duced above were primarily based on traditionally syntactic-oriented dependency models, for instance, 
the Stanford Typed Dependencies annotation scheme (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008) or other anno-
tation schemes that specifically designed for each individual language. Thus, there is no consistency 
among different treebanks. In addition, although there are some qualitative investigations on the distinc-
tions between the UD annotation scheme and various traditional syntactic-oriented annotation schemes 
(e.g. Osborne and Maxwell, 2015), and the existing studies also include some empirical studies focusing 
primarily on the consistently annotated UD scheme (e.g. Chen and Gerdes, 2017; 2018), it is still of our 
interest  that,  compared  with  those  based  on  consistently  annotated  traditionally  syntactic-oriented 
schemes, whether linguistic analysis based on the UD annotation scheme can still function as a metric 
of syntactic difficulty and cognitive demand, and if it can, what are the reasons for these distinctions? 

Therefore, the deficiency of investigations into annotation scheme of treebanks leads to the inquiry 
of current study. We attempt at making comparisons of dependency  distances based on two different 
annotation schemes, UD and SUD. Aimed to address the issues mentioned above, the following ques-
tions are under discussion based on UD and SUD treebanks: 

 

(1) Will the probability distribution of dependency distances of natural texts change when they are based 
on different annotation schemes? Do they still follow the linguistic law of DDM?  
(2)  Based  on  MDDs,  which  annotation  scheme  is  more  congruent  for  the  measurement  of  syntactic 
complexity and cognitive demand?  
(3)  Which  dependency  types  account  most  for  the  distinctions  between  UD  and  SUD  annotation 
schemes?  
 

2  Materials and Methods 

Taking English language as an example, we adopt the Georgetown University Multilayer Corpus (GUM) 
(Zeldes, 2017) in UD 2.2 and SUD 2.2 projects. Both versions of the treebank are consisted of seven 
genres, viz. academic writing, biographies, fiction, interviews, news stories, travel guides and how-to 
guides. Since the treebanks are balanced in term of genres, it would better demonstrate the general fea-
tures of the probability distribution of dependency distance when we adopt different annotation schemes. 
To measure the effectiveness of MDDs as a metric of syntactic difficulty and cognitive demand in a 
broad sense, the testing sets of 20 languages with two versions of annotations were drawn from the UD 
2.2 and SUD 2.2 to form 20 corresponding treebanks. There 20 languages are Arabic (ara), Bulgarian 
(bul), Catalan (cat), Chinese (chi), Czech (cze), Danish (dan), Dutch (dut), Greek (ell), English (eng), 
Basque (eus), German (ger), Hungarian (hun), Italian (ita), Japanese (jpn), Portuguese (por), Roma-
nian  (rum),  Slovenian  (slv),  Spanish(sp),  Swedish  (swe)  and  Turkish  (tur).  These  20  treebank-pairs 
would help to demonstrate the features and distinctions of syntactic- and semantic-oriented annotation 
schemes in measuring syntactic complexity and cognitive constraint.  

As for the calculation of dependency distance, we adopted Jiang and Liu’ (2015) approach. Formally, 
let W1...Wi...Wn be a word string. For any dependency relation between the words Wx and Wy (x ≥ 1, y 
≤ n), if Wx is a head and Wy is its dependent, then the dependency distance between them is defined as 
the difference x – y; by this measure, the dependency distance of adjacent words is 1.  

The MDD of the entire sentence can be defined as: 

MDD (sentence) = 

1
𝑛−1

∑

𝑛−1
𝑖=1 DD𝑖| 
|

   

(1) 

In this formula, n is the number of words in the sentence and DDi is the dependency distance of the i-th 
syntactic relation of the sentence. Usually in a sentence there is one word (the root verb) without a head, 
whose DD is defined as zero. 

The MDD of a treebank can be defined as: 

MDD (treebank) = 

1
𝑛−𝑠

∑

𝑛−𝑠
𝑖=1 DD𝑖| 
|

 

 

 (2) 

Here, n is the total number of words in the sample, s is the total number of sentences in the sample and 
DDi is the dependency distance of the i-th syntactic link of the sample. 

When it comes to the MDD for a specific type of dependency relation in a sample, the formula can 

be shown as follows: 

1
MDD (dependency type) = 
𝑛

𝑛
∑ DD𝑖
𝑖=1

 

 

 

 (3) 

In this case, n is the number of examples of that relation in the sample. DDi is the dependency distance 
of the i-th dependency type. 

For both UD and SUD annotations, the formats of their representations are CoNll-X (de Marneffe & 
Manning, 2008). Table 1 is a simplified CoNll-X version of the sample sentence with UD annotation 
scheme.  
 

Order 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

Relation 
Dependency Type 
nsubj 
root 
case 
det 
obl 
Table 1. Simplified Annotation of We walked along the lake in UD Treebank. 

Dependent 
Lemma 
we 
walk 
along 
the 
lake 

Feature 
PRP 
VBP 
IN 
DT 
NN 

Head 
Order 
2 
0 
5 
5 
2 

POS 
PRON 
VERB 
ADP 
DET 
NOUN 

Word 
We 
walked 
along 
the 
lake 

 
Take the first line in Table 1 for example. It shows that the second word walked in the sentence has a 
dependent we, which is the first word of the sentence. The type of this dependency is nsubj, or nominal 
subject. As for the second line, it indicates that the root of the sentence is walked, signifying the head of 
the whole sentence rather than demonstrating a dependency relation; hence it is removed during com-
putation. Regarding the sample sentence above, the DD of nsubj (line one) is 2 – 1 = 1; case (line three) 
is 5 – 3 = 2; det (line four) is 5 – 4 = 1; obl (line five) is 2 – 5 = – 3. Hence, following formula (1), the 
MDD of the sentence can be obtained as follows: (|1|+|2|+|1|+|– 3|)/4=1.75. Similarly, the MDD of the 
sample sentence based on SUD annotation scheme in Figure 1 (b) is (|1|+|– 1|+1+|– 2|)/4=1.25. 
 

3  Results and Discussion 

Taking English language as an example, we would first focus on the probability distribution of depend-
ency distance to investigate whether it follows the linguistic law of DDM when we adopt two distinctive 
annotation schemes. Following what Liu (2008) did, we would then calculate MDDs of 20 languages 
based on two annotation schemes to demonstrate which annotation is more effective to measure syntactic 
difficulty and cognitive demand. Finally, specific dependency types in the treebank of GUM would be 
under investigation to display the possible underlying explanation beneath the distinctions between these 
two annotation schemes. 

3.1  Annotation Scheme and Probability Distribution of Dependency Distance 

It is believed that dependency distance is cognitively restrained by human working memory (Liu et al., 
2017). Therefore, human beings tend to minimize the dependency distances while interpreting or pro-
ducing languages. Hence, based on different syntactic-oriented annotation schemes, it has been found 
that the probability distribution of dependency distances of natural languages follows similar distribu-
tional patterns, including right truncated zeta (Jiang and Liu, 2015; Wang and Liu, 2017; Liu et al., 2017) 
and right truncated waring (Jiang and Liu, 2015; Lu and Liu, 2016; Wang and Liu, 2017).  

Following these researches, we fitted dependency distances of all 95 texts of GUM to these two prob-
ability distributions by the fitting program of probability distributions, Altmann-Fitter3. Since the deter-
mination coefficient R2 can indicate the goodness-of-fit (Wang and Liu, 2017; Wang and Yan, 2018), 
the mean values of the determination coefficient R2 in all seven genres were calculated. Conventionally, 
the excellent, good, acceptable and not acceptable goodness-of-fit for determination coefficient R2 are 
0.90, 0.80, 0.75 and less than 0.75, respectively.   

It was found that the mean determination coefficient R2 in the model fitting of right truncated waring 
and right truncated zeta based on both UD and SUD are larger than 0.80, indicating that the fitting results 
are good. In other words, the frequencies of dependency distances based on both UD and SUD treebanks 
can well capture the models of right truncated waring and right truncated zeta with a good coefficients 
of determination R2.  

To conclude, the probability distributions of dependency distances of natural texts based on both UD 
and SUD annotation schemes share similar power law distribution, viz. the frequency of dependency 
distance  decreases  with the  increase  of  the  dependency  distance. The  results  reveal  that dependency 
distance distributions of all texts based on both UD and SUD follow the same regularity, supporting the 
Least Effort Principle (LEP) (Zipf, 1965) or the linguistic law of DDM (Liu, 2008; Futrell et al., 2015; 
Liu et al., 2017). 

3.2  Annotation Scheme and Mean Dependency Distance  

Except the probability  distribution  of  dependency  distance,  the  syntactic  and cognitive  parameter  of 
MDDs is also of our interest. Hence, the MDDs of all 20 corresponding treebanks based on UD and 
SUD were calculated in accordance with formula (2). Our results show that although these two annota-
tion schemes are divergent from each other, what is in common is that the MDDs of all 20 languages 
based on both annotation schemes are within 4 (Cowan, 2001), showing that the syntactic complexity 
of human languages is constrained by human cognitive limitation or LEP rather than annotation scheme 
itself. This is consistent with what we’ve discovered in Section 3.1. Moreover, what is noteworthy is 
that MDDs based on 20 UD treebanks are always larger than those based on SUD for each individual 
language. This means that language materials based on UD annotation scheme lead to the interpretation 
of larger MDDs. Theoretically, it is believed that annotation schemes that lead to shorter MDDs is more 
linguistically applicable (Osborne and Gerdes, 2019). Hence, the SUD annotation scheme seems to be 
more suitable for reflecting the human cognitive demand and the syntactic complexity of the language 
under processing.  

This was followed by a dependent-samples t test. The result shows that MDDs based on UD (M = 
2.86, SD = .32) are significantly longer than MDDs that based on SUD (M = 2.52, SD = .39), t (19) = 
11.10, p < .05, d4 = 2.48. The p-value of .000 is less than .05, the null hypothesis that the means of MDD 
based on different annotation schemes are equal is rejected. Moreover, according to Cohen’s conven-
tions, the effect size of 2.48 corresponds to a large effect in practice and indicates that the MDDs based 
on UD was rated 2.48 standard deviations longer in distance than was SUD. Hence, with the distinction 
of annotation schemes, natural language texts based on UD annotation scheme tend to have longer MDD 
than that based on SUD.  

In addition, the results of MDDs based on SUD are closer to those of Liu (2008: 174). This might be 
due to the fact that both the SUD annotation scheme and what Liu (2008) based on belong to the category 
of syntactic-oriented annotation schemes.  Although some languages have larger MDDs (e.g. Hungarian 
(hun) and Chinese (chi)) and the other have smaller ones (e.g. Turkish (tur) and Japanese (jpn)) in Liu 
(2008) than those based on SUD, this might be attributed to that the annotation schemes of Liu (2008) 
are not consistently annotated across languages. Hence, when it comes to the relationship between an-
notation scheme and MDD, although still within a threshold of 4, MDD of language materials based on 
UD annotation scheme tends to be longer than that based on SUD, and the difference is significant. 
Moreover, the MDDs based on SUD share great similarities with those based on Liu (2008). Thus, to 
some extent, it can be summarized that the syntactic-oriented SUD is comparatively  more expedient 
annotation scheme to researches concerning syntactic complexity and cognitive demand.  
 
                                                                                 
3See also https://www.ram-verlag.eu/software-neu/software/.  
4A commonly used effect size statistic for the dependent-samples t test is d. In accordance with Cohen’s (1988) conventions, 
small, medium, and large effect sizes for the dependent samples t test are .20, .50, and .80, respectively. 

3.3  Annotation Scheme and Annotating Preference 

In Section 3.1 and Section 3.2, we investigated the universal inclination of DDM for natural languages 
and MDD as an indicator of syntactic complexity as well as cognitive demand based on two different 
annotation schemes. In  Section 3.3, the reasons for the similarities as well as distinctions are of our 
interest. Since it is impossible to make detailed analysis based on all 20 corresponding treebanks, the 
English treebank of GUM is under investigation as a representative.  

Since the SUD annotation scheme is near-isomorphic to the UD initiative (Gerdes et al., 2018), tree-
banks based on UD and SUD are very similar to a large extent. The greatest difference between UD and 
SUD treebanks is the direction of the dependency types used to indicate the relations between function 
words and content words. In this case, UD’s aux, cop, mark and case dependencies indicate dependency 
relations pointed from content words to function words (e.g. the case relation between lake and along 
as shown in Figure 1 (a)), while their directions are inverted in SUD and renamed as comp as shown in 
Table 2 (e.g. the comp relation between along and lake in Figure 1 (b)) (Gerdes et al., 2018: 71). Mean-
while, other subordinate dependency relations remain intact.  
 

UD Dependency 
aux, cop, mark, case, xcomp, 
ccomp, obj, iobj, obl:arg 

Corresponding SUD Dependency 

comp 

Table 2. General Corresponding Dependency Relations in UD and SUD Annotation Schemes. 

 
As Table 2 shows, the comp relation in SUD is consisted of more than four UD types (i.e. aux, cop, 
mark and case). Hence, according to Gerdes et al. (2018: 72), we nailed down the actual 4 corresponding 
pairs that differentiate the UD and SUD annotation schemes in Table 3. They are aux and comp:aux, 
aux:pass and comp:pass, cop and comp:cop, and finally, mark & case and comp.  
 

UD 

Relation 

auxiliary 

Type 

comp:aux 

SUD 

Relation 

complement: auxiliary 

aux:pass 

passive auxiliary 

comp:pass 

complement: passive auxiliary 

copula 

marker 

comp:cop 

complement: copula 

complement: subordinating conjunction 

comp 

case 

case marking 

complement: adposition 

Table 3. Detailed Corresponding Dependency Relations in UD and SUD Annotation Schemes. 

 
In Table 3, all the dependency relations in UD are head-final, and in SUD head-initial. In other words, 
nearly all comp:aux, comp:pass, comp:cop and comp in SUD designate the function words as heads 
over content words, hence the dependency directions are negative. Correspondingly, nearly all the aux, 
aux:pass, cop and mark & case in UD choose content words as head; hence the dependency directions 
are also altered. This shows that the underlying reason for the distinction between UD and SUD anno-
tation scheme is that the UD annotation scheme favours taking the content words as the head of function 
words while the SUD annotation scheme chooses the function words as heads over content words in 
dependency relations (Nivre, 2015; Gerdes et al., 2018; Osborne and Gerdes, 2019). To be specific, the 
UD treebanks first connect the content words and then the function words to emphasize the semantic 
similarities  of  all  languages,  while  the  SUD  treebanks  connect  content  words  mediated  by  function 
words to complete the functional roles of function words. Consequently, the more the number of modi-
fiers before noun (between the apposition and the noun) is, the longer the dependency distance between 
the verb (root) and the noun. For instance, the distance between walked and lake in Figure 1 (a) would 

Type 

aux 

cop 

mark 

enlarge if there are more modifier before the noun lake. Hence, the longer MDDs in UD treebanks can 
be attributed to the emphasis on semantic relations within sentence structure. 

In fact, designating the head of linguistic structure has always been a focus of modern grammar, not 
only for dependency grammar but also for constituency-based frameworks (Jackendoff, 1977; Zwicky, 
1985; Pollard and Sag, 1994), especially when it comes to the function words within sentence structure 
(de Marneffe and Nivre, 2019). The design of the SUD representation that prioritizes function words as 
heads  over  content  words  is  in  line  with  most  traditional  syntaxes  (Hudson,  1984;  Mel’čuk,  1988; 
Starosta, 1988; Eroms, 2000). Moreover, under the framework of dependency grammar, the status of 
function words has also been discussed by many theoretical studies (e.g. Groß and Osborne, 2015; Os-
borne and Maxwell, 2015). However, most studies focus on one aspect of function words or emphasize 
the qualitative features of dependency relations that related to function words. The current section pro-
vides some empirical evidence of the status of function words in semantic-oriented UD and syntactic-
oriented SUD treebanks.  

4  Conclusions and Implications 

Through observation and calculation, it can be found that based on UD and SUD annotation schemes, 
natural English texts exhibit similar probability distribution. No matter what the genre of the text is, both 
share a power law distribution with a trend of minimizing dependency distance. This is also consistent 
with  the  well-exemplified DDM  theory  corroborated by  Liu  et  al.  (2017),  showing  the  limitation  of 
human working memory capacity. 

When 20 corresponding treebanks are under investigation, the MDDs of Liu (2008)’s study and our 
study based on SUD annotation scheme are similar with each other, and they are significantly shorter 
than those based on UD, showing the consistency of syntactic-oriented annotation schemes and the pos-
sibility of applying SUD to language materials to measure syntactic complexity and cognitive demand. 
Moreover, the reason underlying for the distinctions between UD and SUD annotation schemes is the 
dependency  types indicating  the  relations  between  apposition  and  noun. The  UD  annotation  scheme 
prefers a semantic orientation, while the SUD annotation scheme favours a syntactic orientation which 
holds a function-word priority. To be specific, the corresponding pairs, aux and comp:aux, aux:pass 
and comp:pass, cop and comp:cop, and mark & case and comp in UD and SUD annotation schemes 
lead to longer MDDs of UD treebanks.  

Therefore, the current study suggests that, to some extent, the consistently syntactic-oriented annota-
tion scheme (SUD) is better than the consistently semantic-oriented one (UD) in linguistic analysis of 
syntactic complexity and human cognitive demand. However, it is still worthwhile to spare more efforts 
to assess the effectiveness of consistently annotated syntactic-oriented representation to capture both the 
variations and universals of natural human languages.  
 

References 

Chicago. 

286-310. 

Amir Zeldes. 2017. The GUM corpus: creating multilayer resources in the classroom. Language Resources and 

Evaluation, 51(3):581-612. DOI: 10.1007/s10579-016-9343-x  

Anne Abeillé. 2003. Treebank: Building and Using Parsed Corpora. Kluwer Academic Publisher, Dordrecht. 

Arnold M. Zwicky. 1985. Heads. Journal of Linguistics, 21:1-29. 

Carl J. Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. 1994.  Head-Driven Phrase  Structure Grammar. University of  Chicago Press, 

Daniel Gildea and David Temperley. 2010. Do grammars minimize dependency length? Cognitive Science, 34(2): 

Edward  Gibson.  1998.  Linguistic  complexity:  locality  of  syntactic  dependencies.  Cognition,  68(1):1–76.  DOI: 

10.1016/s0010-0277(98)00034-1 

Hafner Publishing Company, New York. 

Science, 9(2):159-191. 

George K. Zipf. 1965. Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort: An  Introduction to Human Ecology. 

Haitao Liu. 2008. Dependency distance as a metric of language comprehension difficulty.  Journal of Cognitive 

Haitao Liu. 2009. Dependency Grammar: From Theory to Practice. Science Press, Beijing. 

Haitao Liu. 2010. Dependency direction as a means of word-order typology a method based on dependency tree-

banks. Lingua, 120(6):1567-1578. 

Haitao Liu and Chunshan Xu. 2012. Quantitative typological analysis of Romance languages. Poznań Studies in 

Contemporary Linguistics, 48(4):597-625. 

Haitao Liu, Chunshan Xu, and Junying Liang. 2017. Dependency distance: A new perspective on syntactic patterns 

in natural languages. Physics of Life Reviews, 21:171-193. 

Haitao Liu, Yiyi Zhao, and Wenwen Li. 2009. Chinese syntactic and typological properties based on dependency 

syntactic Treebanks. Poznań Studies in Contemporary Linguistics, 45(4):509-523. 

Hans  Jürgen  Heringer.  1993.  Dependency  syntax-basic  ideas  and  the  classical  model.  Syntax-An  International 

Handbook of Contemporary Research, volume 1, 298-316. 

Hans-Werner Eroms. 2000. Syntax der deutschen Sprache. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory and Practice. The SUNY Press, Albany, N.Y. 

Jingyang Jiang and Haitao Liu. 2015. The effects of sentence length on dependency distance, dependency direction 
and the implications–Based on a parallel English–Chinese dependency Treebank. Language Sciences, 50:93-
104.  

Joakim Nivre. 2015. Towards a Universal Grammar for Natural Language Processing. Computational Linguistics 

and Intelligent Text Processing, 3-16. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18111-0_1 

Joel E. Cohen. 1988. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd ed. Lawrence Erlbaum Associ-

ates, Hillsdale, NJ. 

Johanna Nichols. 1986. Head-marking and dependent-marking grammar. Language, 62:56-119. 

John A. Hawkins. 2004. Efficiency and Complexity in Grammars. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 

John  Brown.  1958.  Some  tests  of  the  decay  theory  of  immediate  memory.  Quarterly  Journal  of  Experimental 

Psychology, 10:173-189. 

Kim Gerdes, Bruno Guillaume, Sylvain Kahane, and Guy Perrier. 2018. SUD or Surface-Syntactic Universal De-
pendencies: An annotation scheme near-isomorphic to UD. In Proceedings of Universal Dependencies Work-
shop 2018, 66-74. Brussels. 

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe structurale. Klincksieck, Paris. 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Manning. 2008. Stanford Typed Dependencies Manual.  Tech-

Marie-Catherine  de  Marneffe  and  Joakim  Nivre.  2019.  Dependency  Grammar.  Annual  Review  of  Linguistics, 

Nelson Cowan. 2001. The magical number 4 in short-term memory: A reconsideration of mental storage capacity. 

Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24(1):87-185. 

Peter H. Matthews. 1981. Syntax. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Qian Lu, Chunshan Xu, and Haitao Liu. 2016. Can chunking reduce syntactic complexity of natural languages? 

Ramon  Ferrer-i-Cancho.  2004.  Euclidean  distance  between  syntactically  linked  words.  Physical  Review  E, 

nical Report, 338-345. 

5:197-218.  

Complexity, 21(S2):33-41. 

70:056135. 

Ray S. Jackendoff. 1972. Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar. MIT Press, Cambridge. 

Richard Futrell, Kyle Mahowald, and Edward Gibson. 2015. Large-scale evidence of dependency length minimi-

zation in 37 languages. PNAS, 112:10336-10341. 

Richard Hudson. 1984. Word Grammar. Basil Blackwell, New York. 

Richard Hudson. 1995. Measuring syntactic difficulty. http://dickhudson.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Diffi-

culty.pdf 

Roger Levy, Evelina Fedorenko, and Edward Gibson. 2013. The syntactic complexity of Russian relative clauses. 

Journal of Memory and Language, 69 (4):461-495. 

So Hiranuma. 1999. Syntactic difficulty in English and Japanese: A textual study.  UCL Working Papers in Lin-

Stanley Starosta. 1988. The Case for Lexicase: An Outline of Lexicase  Grammatical Theory. Pinter Publishers, 

guistics, 11:309-322.  

New York. 

Thomas Groß and Timothy Osborne. 2015. The dependency status of function words: auxiliaries. In Eva Hajičová 
and & Joakim Nivre (eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Dependency Linguistics, pp. 
111-120. Stroudsburg, PA: Assoc. Comput. Linguist. 

Timothy Osborne and Daniel Maxwell. 2015. A historical overview of the status of function words in dependency 
grammar.  In  Eva  Hajičová  and  &  Joakim  Nivre  (eds.),  Proceedings  of  the 3rd  International  Conference  on 
Dependency Linguistics, pp. 241-250. Stroudsburg, PA: Assoc. Comput. Linguist. 

Timothy  Osborne  and  Kim  Gerdes.  2019. The  status  of  function  words  in  dependency  grammar: A  critique  of 
Universal Dependencies (UD). Glossa: A Journal of General Linguistics, 4(1):17.1-28. DOI: 10.5334/gjgl.537 

Yaqin Wang and Haitao Liu. 2017. The effects of genre on dependency distance and dependency direction. Lan-

guage Sciences, 59:135-147. 

Yaqin Wang and Jianwei Yan. 2018. A quantitative analysis on a literary genre Essay’s syntactic features. In Jing-
yang Jiang & Haitao Liu (eds.), Quantitative Analysis of Dependency Structures, pp. 295-314. Berlin/Boston: 
De Gruyter Mouton. 

 

 

