7
1
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
0
6
5
1
0
.
3
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

LR-GAN: LAYERED RECURSIVE GENERATIVE AD-
VERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR IMAGE GENERATION

Jianwei Yang∗
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
jw2yang@vt.edu

Anitha Kannan
Facebook AI Research
Menlo Park, CA
akannan@fb.com

Dhruv Batra∗and Devi Parikh∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA
{dbatra, parikh}@gatech.edu

ABSTRACT

We present LR-GAN: an adversarial image generation model which takes scene
structure and context into account. Unlike previous generative adversarial net-
works (GANs), the proposed GAN learns to generate image background and fore-
grounds separately and recursively, and stitch the foregrounds on the background
in a contextually relevant manner to produce a complete natural image. For each
foreground, the model learns to generate its appearance, shape and pose. The
whole model is unsupervised, and is trained in an end-to-end manner with gradient
descent methods. The experiments demonstrate that LR-GAN can generate more
natural images with objects that are more human recognizable than DCGAN. The
code is available at https://github.com/jwyang/lr-gan.pytorch.

1

INTRODUCTION

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) have shown signiﬁcant promise
as generative models for natural images. A ﬂurry of recent work has proposed improvements over
the original GAN work for image generation (Radford et al., 2015; Denton et al., 2015; Salimans
et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2016), multi-stage image generation
including part-based models (Im et al., 2016; Kwak & Zhang, 2016), image generation conditioned
on input text or attributes (Mansimov et al., 2015; Reed et al., 2016b;a), image generation based on
3D structure (Wang & Gupta, 2016), and even video generation (Vondrick et al., 2016).

While the holistic ‘gist’ of images generated by these approaches is beginning to look natural, there
is clearly a long way to go. For instance, the foreground objects in these images tend to be deformed,
blended into the background, and not look realistic or recognizable.

One fundamental limitation of these methods is that they attempt to generate images without taking
into account that images are 2D projections of a 3D visual world, which has a lot of structures in it.
This manifests as structure in the 2D images that capture this world. One example of this structure
is that images tend to have a background, and foreground objects are placed in this background in
contextually relevant ways.

We develop a GAN model that explicitly encodes this structure. Our proposed model generates im-
ages in a recursive fashion: it ﬁrst generates a background, and then conditioned on the background
generates a foreground along with a shape (mask) and a pose (afﬁne transformation) that together
deﬁne how the background and foreground should be composed to obtain a complete image. Condi-
tioned on this composite image, a second foreground and an associated shape and pose are generated,
and so on. As a byproduct in the course of recursive image generation, our approach generates some
object-shape foreground-background masks in a completely unsupervised way, without access to
any object masks for training. Note that decomposing a scene into foreground-background layers is
a classical ill-posed problem in computer vision. By explicitly factorizing appearance and transfor-
mation, LR-GAN encodes natural priors about the images that the same foreground can be ‘pasted’
to the different backgrounds, under different afﬁne transformations. According to the experiments,
the absence of these priors result in degenerate foreground-background decompositions, and thus
also degenerate ﬁnal composite images.

∗Work was done while visiting Facebook AI Research.

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 1: Generation results of our model on CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). It generates images
in two timesteps. At the ﬁrst timestep, it generates background images, while generates foreground
images, masks and transformations at the second timestep. Then, they are composed to obtain the
ﬁnal images. From top left to bottom right (row major), the blocks are real images, generated
background images, foreground images, foreground masks, carved foreground images, carved and
transformed foreground images, ﬁnal composite images, and their nearest neighbor real images in
the training set. Note that the model is trained in a completely unsupervised manner.

We mainly evaluate our approach on four datasets: MNIST-ONE (one digit) and MNIST-TWO (two
digits) synthesized from MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) and
CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). We show qualitatively (via samples) and quantitatively (via evalu-
ation metrics and human studies on Amazon Mechanical Turk) that LR-GAN generates images that
globally look natural and contain clear background and object structures in them that are realistic
and recognizable by humans as semantic entities. An experimental snapshot on CUB-200 is shown
in Fig. 1. We also ﬁnd that LR-GAN generates foreground objects that are contextually relevant to
the backgrounds (e.g., horses on grass, airplanes in skies, ships in water, cars on streets, etc.). For
quantitative comparison, besides existing metrics in the literature, we propose two new quantitative
metrics to evaluate the quality of generated images. The proposed metrics are derived from the sufﬁ-
cient conditions for the closeness between generated image distribution and real image distribution,
and thus supplement existing metrics.

2 RELATED WORK

Early work in parametric texture synthesis was based on a set of hand-crafted features (Portilla &
Simoncelli, 2000). Recent improvements in image generation using deep neural networks mainly
fall into one of the two stochastic models: variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma et al., 2016)
and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). VAEs pair a top-down prob-
abilistic generative network with a bottom up recognition network for amortized probabilistic infer-
ence. Two networks are jointly trained to maximize a variational lower bound on the data likelihood.
GANs consist of a generator and a discriminator in a minmax game with the generator aiming to
fool the discriminator with its samples with the latter aiming to not get fooled.

Sequential models have been pivotal for improved image generation using variational autoencoders:
DRAW (Gregor et al., 2015) uses attention based recurrence conditioning on the canvas drawn so
far. In Eslami et al. (2016), a recurrent generative model that draws one object at a time to the
canvas was used as the decoder in VAE. These methods are yet to show scalability to natural images.
Early compelling results using GANs used sequential coarse-to-ﬁne multiscale generation and class-
conditioning (Denton et al., 2015). Since then, improved training schemes (Salimans et al., 2016)
and better convolutional structure (Radford et al., 2015) have improved the generation results using

2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

GANs. PixelRNN (van den Oord et al., 2016) is also recently proposed to sequentially generates a
pixel at a time, along the two spatial dimensions.

In this paper, we combine the merits of sequential generation with the ﬂexibility of GANs. Our
model for sequential generation imbibes a recursive structure that more naturally mimics image
composition by inferring three components: appearance, shape, and pose. One closely related work
combining recursive structure with GAN is that of Im et al. (2016) but it does not explicitly model
object composition and follows a similar paradigm as by Gregor et al. (2015). Another closely re-
lated work is that of Kwak & Zhang (2016). It combines recursive structure and alpha blending.
However, our work differs in three main ways: (1) We explicitly use a generator for modeling the
foreground poses. That provides signiﬁcant advantage for natural images, as shown by our ablation
studies; (2) Our shape generator is separate from the appearance generator. This factored repre-
sentation allows more ﬂexibility in the generated scenes; (3) Our recursive framework generates
subsequent objects conditioned on the current and previous hidden vectors, and previously gener-
ated object. This allows for explicit contextual modeling among generated elements in the scene.
See Fig. 17 for contextually relevant foregrounds generated for the same background, or Fig. 6 for
meaningful placement of two MNIST digits relative to each.

Models that provide supervision to image generation using conditioning variables have also been
proposed: Style/Structure GANs (Wang & Gupta, 2016) learns separate generative models for style
and structure that are then composed to obtain ﬁnal images. In Reed et al. (2016a), GAN based
image generation is conditioned on text and the region in the image where the text manifests, spec-
iﬁed during training via keypoints or bounding boxes. While not the focus of our work, the model
proposed in this paper can be easily extended to take into account these forms of supervision.

3 PRELIMINARIES

3.1 GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) consist of a generator G and a discriminator D that are
simultaneously trained with competing goals: The generator G is trained to generate samples that
can ‘fool’ a discriminator D, while the discriminator is trained to classify its inputs as either real
(coming from the training dataset) or fake (coming from the samples of G). This competition leads
to a minmax formulation with a value function:

Ex∼pdata(x)[log(D(x; θD))] + Ez∼pz(z)[log(1 − D(G(z; θG); θD))]

(1)

(cid:17)

,

(cid:16)

min
θG

max
θD

where z is a random vector from a standard multivariate Gaussian or a uniform distribution pz(z),
G(z; θG) maps z to the data space, D(x) is the probability that x is real estimated by D. The
advantage of the GANs formulation is that it lacks an explicit loss function and instead uses the
discriminator to optimize the generative model. The discriminator, in turn, only cares whether the
sample it receives is on the data manifold, and not whether it exactly matches a particular training
example (as opposed to losses such as MSE). Hence, the discriminator provides a gradient signal
only when the generated samples do not lie on the data manifold so that the generator can readjust
its parameters accordingly. This form of training enables learning the data manifold of the training
set and not just optimizing to reconstruct the dataset, as in autoencoder and its variants.

While the GANs framework is largely agnostic to the choice of G and D, it is clear that generative
models with the ‘right’ inductive biases will be more effective in learning from the gradient infor-
mation (Denton et al., 2015; Im et al., 2016; Gregor et al., 2015; Reed et al., 2016a; Yan et al., 2015).
With this motivation, we propose a generator that models image generation via a recurrent process
– in each time step of the recurrence, an object with its own appearance and shape is generated and
warped according to a generated pose to compose an image in layers.

3.2 LAYERED STRUCTURE OF IMAGE

An image taken of our 3D world typically contains a layered structure. One way of representing an
image layer is by its appearance and shape. As an example, an image x with two layers, foreground
f and background b may be factorized as:

x = f (cid:12) m + b (cid:12) (1 − m),

(2)

3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

where m is the mask depicting the shapes of image layers, and (cid:12) the element wise multiplication
operator. Some existing methods assume the access to the shape of the object either during training
(Isola & Liu, 2013) or both at train and test time (Reed et al., 2016a; Yan et al., 2015). Representing
images in layered structure is even straightforward for video with moving objects (Darrell & Pent-
land, 1991; Wang & Adelson, 1994; Kannan et al., 2005). Vondrick et al. (2016) generates videos
by separately generating a ﬁxed background and moving foregrounds. A similar way of generating
single image can be found in Kwak & Zhang (2016).

Another way is modeling the layered structure with object appearance and pose as:

x = ST (f , a) + b,

(3)

where f and b are foreground and background, respectively; a is the afﬁne transformation; ST is
the spatial transformation operator. Several works fall into this group (Roux et al., 2011; Huang &
Murphy, 2015; Eslami et al., 2016). In Huang & Murphy (2015), images are decomposed into layers
of objects with speciﬁc poses in a variational autoencoder framework, while the number of objects
(i.e., layers) is adaptively estimated in Eslami et al. (2016).

To contrast with these works, LR-GAN uses a layered composition, and the foreground layers si-
multaneously model all three dominant factors of variation: appearance f , shape m and pose a. We
will elaborate it in the following section.

4 LAYERED RECURSIVE GAN (LR-GAN)

The basic structure of LR-GAN is similar to GAN: it consists of a discriminator and a generator that
are simultaneously trained using the minmax formulation of GAN, as described in §.3.1. The key
innovation of our work is the layered recursive generator, which is what we describe in this section.

The generator in LR-GAN is recursive in that the image is constructed recursively using a recurrent
network. Layered in that each recursive step composes an object layer that is ‘pasted’ on the image
generated so far. Object layer at timestep t is parameterized by the following three constituents –
‘canonical’ appearance ft, shape (or mask) mt, and pose (or afﬁne transformation) at for warping
the object before pasting in the image composition.

Fig. 2 shows the architecture of the LR-GAN with the generator architecture unrolled for generating
.
background x0 (
= xb) and foreground x1 and x2. At each time step t, the generator composes the
next image xt via the following recursive computation:

xt = ST (mt, at)
(cid:125)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
afﬁne transformed mask

(cid:124)

(cid:12)

ST (ft, at)
(cid:125)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
(cid:124)
afﬁne transformed appearance

,
+ (1 − ST (mt, at)) (cid:12) xt−1
(cid:125)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
pasting on image composed so far

(cid:124)

∀t ∈ [1, T ]

(4)

where ST ((cid:5), at) is a spatial transformation operator that outputs the afﬁne transformed version of
(cid:5) with at indicating parameters of the afﬁne transformation.

Since our proposed model has an explicit transformation variable at that is used to warp the object,
it can learn a canonical object representation that can be re-used to generate scenes where the ob-
ject occurs as mere transformations of it, such as different scales or rotations. By factorizing the
appearance, shape and pose, the object generator can focus on separately capturing regularities in
these three factors that constitute an object. We will demonstrate in our experiments that removing
these factorizations from the model leads to its spending capacity in variability that may not solely
be about the object in Section 5.5 and 5.6.

4.1 DETAILS OF GENERATOR ARCHITECTURE

Fig. 2 shows our LR-GAN architecture in detail – we use different shapes to indicate different kinds
of layers (convolutional, fractional convolutional, (non)linear, etc), as indicated by the legend. Our
model consists of two main pieces – a background generator Gb and a foreground generator Gf . Gb
and Gf do not share parameters with each other. Gb computation happens only once, while Gf is
recurrent over time, i.e., all object generators share the same parameters. In the following, we will
introduce each module and connections between them.

Temporal Connections. LR-GAN has two kinds of temporal connections – informally speaking,
one on ‘top’ and one on ‘bottom’. The ‘top’ connections perform the act of sequentially ‘pasting’

4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 2: LR-GAN architecture unfolded to three timesteps. It mainly consists of one background
generator, one foreground generator, temporal connections and one discriminator. The meaning of
each component is explained in the legend.

object layers (Eqn. 4). The ‘bottom’ connections are constructed by a LSTM on the noise vectors
z0, z1, z2. Intuitively, this noise-vector-LSTM provides information to the foreground generator
about what else has been generated in past. Besides, when generating multiple objects, we use a
pooling layer P c
f to extract the information from previous generated
object response map. By this way, the model is able to ‘see’ previously generated objects.

f and a fully-connected layer Ec

Background Generator. The background generator Gb is purposely kept simple. It takes the hidden
state of noise-vector-LSTM h0
l as the input and passes it to a number of fractional convolutional
layers (also called ‘deconvolution’ layer in some papers) to generate images at its end. The output
of background generator xb will be used as the canvas for the following generated foregrounds.

f . Gi

f and Gm

Foreground Generator. The foreground generator Gf is used to generate an object with appearance
and shape. Correspondingly, Gf consists of three sub-modules, Gc
f , which is a common ‘trunk’
whose outputs are shared by Gi
f is used to generate the foreground appearance ft,
while Gm
f generates the mask mt for the foreground. All three sub-modules consists of one or
more fractional convolutional layers combined with batch-normalization and nonlinear layers. The
generated foreground appearance and mask have the same spatial size as the background. The top
of Gm
f is a sigmoid layer in order to generate one channel mask whose values range in (0, 1).
Spatial Transformer. To spatially transform foreground objects, we need to estimate the trans-
formation matrix. As in Jaderberg et al. (2015), we predict the afﬁne transformation matrix with a
linear layer Tf that has six-dimensional outputs. Then based on the predicted transformation matrix,
we use a grid generator Gg to generate the corresponding sampling coordinates in the input for each
location at the output. The generated foreground appearance and mask share the same transforma-
tion matrix, and thus the same sampling grid. Given the grid, the sampler S will simultaneously
sample the ft and mt to obtain ˆft and ˆmt, respectively. Different from Jaderberg et al. (2015),
our sampler here normally performs downsampling, since the the foreground typically has smaller
size than the background. Pixels in ˆft and ˆmt that are from outside the extent of ft and mt are set
to zero. Finally, ˆft and ˆmt are sent to the compositor C which combines the canvas xt−1 and ˆft
through layered composition with blending weights given by ˆmt (Eqn. 4).

Pseudo-code for our approach and detailed model conﬁguration are provided in the Appendix.

5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

4.2 NEW EVALUATION METRICS

Several metrics have been proposed to evaluate GANs, such as Gaussian parzen window (Good-
fellow et al., 2014), Generative Adversarial Metric (GAM) (Im et al., 2016) and Inception Score
(Salimans et al., 2016). The common goal is to measure the similarity between the generated data
distribution Pg(x) = G(z; θz) and the real data distribution P (x). Most recently, Inception Score
has been used in several works (Salimans et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2016). However, it is an assymetric
metric and could be easily fooled by generating centers of data modes.

In addition to these metrics, we present two new metrics based on the following intuition – a suf-
ﬁcient (but not necessary) condition for closeness of Pg(x) and P (x) is closeness of Pg(x|y) and
P (x|y), i.e., distributions of generated data and real data conditioned on all possible variables of
interest y, e.g., category label. One way to obtain this variable of interest y is via human annotation.
Speciﬁcally, given the data sampled from Pg(x) and P (x), we ask people to label the category of the
samples according to some rules. Note that such human annotation is often easier than comparing
samples from the two distributions (e.g., because there is no 1:1 correspondence between samples
to conduct forced-choice tests).

After the annotations, we need to verify whether the two distributions are similar in each category.
Clearly, directly comparing the distributions Pg(x|y) and P (x|y) may be as difﬁcult as compar-
ing Pg(x) and P (x). Fortunately, we can use Bayes rule and alternatively compare Pg(y|x) and
P (y|x), which is a much easier task. In this case, we can simply train a discriminative model on
the samples from Pg(x) and P (x) together with the human annotations about categories of these
samples. With a slight abuse of notation, we use Pg(y|x) and P (y|x) to denote probability outputs
from these two classiﬁers (trained on generated samples vs trained on real samples). We can then
use these two classiﬁers to compute the following two evaluation metrics:

Adversarial Accuracy: Computes the classiﬁcation accuracies achieved by these two classiﬁers on
a validation set, which can be the training set or another set of real images sampled from P (x). If
Pg(x) is close to P (x), we expect to see similar accuracies.

Adversarial Divergence: Computes the KL divergence between Pg(y|x) and P (y|x). The lower
the adversarial divergence, the closer two distributions are. The low bound for this metric is exactly
zero, which means Pg(y|x) = P (y|x) for all samples in the validation set.

As discussed above, we need human efforts to label the real and generated samples. Fortunately, we
can further simplify this. Based on the labels given on training data, we split the training data into
categories, and train one generator for each category. With all these generators, we generate samples
of all categories. This strategy will be used in our experiments on the datasets with labels given.

5 EXPERIMENT

We conduct qualitative and quantitative evaluations on three datasets: 1) MNIST (LeCun et al.,
1998); 2) CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009); 3) CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). To add
variability to the MNIST images, we randomly scale (factor of 0.8 to 1.2) and rotate (− π
4 ) the
digits and then stitch them to 48 × 48 uniform backgrounds with random grayscale value between
[0, 200]. Images are then rescaled back to 32 × 32. Each image thus has a different background
grayscale value and a different transformed digit as foreground. We rename this sythensized dataset
as MNIST-ONE (single digit on a gray background). We also synthesize a dataset MNIST-TWO
containing two digits on a grayscale background. We randomly select two images of digits and
perform similar transformations as described above, and put one on the left and the other on the
right side of a 78 × 78 gray background. We resize the whole image to 64 × 64.

4 to π

We develop LR-GAN based on open source code1. We assume the number of objects is known.
Therefore, for MNIST-ONE, MNIST-TWO, CIFAR-10, and CUB-200, our model has two, three,
two, and two timesteps, respectively. Since the size of foreground object should be smaller than
that of canvas, we set the minimal allowed scale 2 in afﬁne transforamtion to be 1.2 for all datasets
except for MNIST-TWO, which is set to 2 (objects are smaller in MNIST-TWO). In LR-GAN, the

1https://github.com/soumith/dcgan.torch
2Scale corresponds to the size of the target canvas with respect to the object – the larger the scale, the larger

the canvas, and the smaller the relative size of the object in the canvas. 1 means the same size as the canvas.

6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 3: Generated images on CIFAR-10 based on our model.

Figure 4: Generated images on CUB-200 based on our model.

background generator and foreground generator have similar architectures. One difference is that
the number of channels in the background generator is half of the one in the foreground generator.
We compare our results to that of DCGAN (Radford et al., 2015). Note that LR-GAN without
LSTM at the ﬁrst timestep corresponds exactly to the DCGAN. This allows us to run controlled
experiments. In both generator and discriminator, all the (fractional) convolutional layers have 4 ×
4 ﬁlter size with stride 2. As a result, the number of layers in the generator and discriminator
automatically adapt to the size of training images. Please see the Appendix (Section 6.2) for details
about the conﬁgurations. We use three metrics for quantitative evaluation, including Inception Score
(Salimans et al., 2016) and the proposed Adversarial Accuracy, Adversarial Divergence. Note that
we report two versions of Inception Score. One is based on the pre-trained Inception net, and the
other one is based on the pre-trained classiﬁer on the target datasets.

5.1 QUALITATIVE RESULTS

In Fig. 3 and 4, we show the generated samples for CIFAR-10 and CUB-200, respectively. MNIST
results are shown in the next subsection. As we can see from the images, the compositional nature
of our model results in the images being free of blending artifacts between backgrounds and fore-
grounds. For CIFAR-10, we can see the horses and cars with clear shapes. For CUB-200, the bird
shapes tend to be even sharper.

5.2 MNIST-ONE AND MNIST-TWO

We now report the results on MNIST-ONE and MNIST-TWO. Fig. 5 shows the generation results of
our model on MNIST-ONE. As we can see, our model generates the background and the foreground
in separate timestep, and can disentagle the foreground digits from background nearly perfectly.
Though initial values of the mask randomly distribute in the range of (0, 1), after training, the masks
are nearly binary and accurately carve out the digits from the generated foreground. More results on
MNIST-ONE (including human studies) can be found in the Appendix (Section 6.3).

Fig. 6 shows the generation results for MNIST-TWO. Similarly, the model is also able to generate
background and the two foreground objects separately. The foreground generator tends to generate
a single digit at each timestep. Meanwhile, it captures the context information from the previous
time steps. When the ﬁrst digit is placed to the left side, the second one tends to be placed on the
right side, and vice versa.

7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 5: Generation results of our model on MNIST-ONE. From left to right, the image blocks are
real images, generated background images, generated foreground images, generated masks and ﬁnal
composite images, respectively.

Figure 6: Generation results of our model on MNIST-TWO. From top left to bottom right (row
major), the image blocks are real images, generated background images, foreground images and
masks at the second timestep, composite images at the second time step, generated foreground
images and masks at the third timestep and the ﬁnal composite images, respectively.

5.3 CUB-200

We study the effectiveness of our model trained on the CUB-200 bird dataset. In Fig. 1, we have
shown a random set of generated images, along with the intermediate generation results of the model.
While being completely unsupervised, the model, for a large fraction of the samples, is able to

Figure 7: Matched pairs of generated images based on DCGAN and LR-GAN, respectivedly. The
odd columns are generated by DCGAN, and the even columns are generated by LR-GAN. These
are paired according to the perfect matching based on Hungarian algorithm.

8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 8: Qualitative comparison on CIFAR-10. Top three rows are images generated by DCGAN;
Bottom three rows are by LR-GAN. From left to right, the blocks display generated images with
increasing quality level as determined by human studies.

successfully disentangle the foreground and the background. This is evident from the generated
bird-like masks.

We do a comparative study based on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) between DCGAN and LR-
GAN to quantify relative visual quality of the generated images. We ﬁrst generated 1000 samples
from both the models. Then, we performed perfect matching between the two image sets using
the Hungarian algorithm on L2 norm distance in the pixel space. This resulted in 1000 image
pairs. Some examplar pairs are shown in Fig. 7. For each image pair, 9 judges are asked to choose
the one that is more realistic. Based on majority voting, we ﬁnd that our generated images are
selected 68.4% times, compared with 31.6% times for DCGAN. This demonstrates that our model
has generated more realistic images than DCGAN. We can attribute this difference to our model’s
ability to generate foreground separately from the background, enabling stronger edge cues.

5.4 CIFAR-10

We now qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate our model on CIFAR-10, which contains multiple
object categories and also various backgrounds.

Comparison of image generation quality: We conduct AMT studies to compare the ﬁdelity of
image generation. Towards this goal, we generate 1000 images from DCGAN and LR-GAN, re-
spectively. We ask 5 judges to label each image to either belong to one of the 10 categories or as
‘non recognizable’ or ‘recognizable but not belonging to the listed categories’. We then assign each
image a quality level between [0,5] that captures the number of judges that agree with the majority
choice. Fig. 8 shows the images generated by both approaches, ordered by increasing quality level.
We merge images at quality level 0 (all judges said non-recognizable) and 1 together, and similarly
images at level 4 and 5. Visually, the generated samples by our model have clearer boundaries and
object structures. We also computed the fraction of non-recognizable images: Our model had a 10%
absolute drop in non-recognizability rate (67.3% for ours vs. 77.7% for DCGAN). For reference,
11.4% of real CIFAR images were categorized as non-recognizable. Fig. 9 shows more generated
(intermediate) results of our model.

Quantitative evaluation on generators: We evaluate the generators based on three metrics: 1)
Inception Score; 2) Adversarial Accuracy; 3) Adversarial Divergence. To obtain a classiﬁer model
for evaluation, we remove the top layer in the discriminator used in our model, and then append
two fully connected layers on the top of it. We train this classiﬁer using the training samples of
CIFAR-10 based on the annotations. Following Salimans et al. (2016), we generated 50,000 images

Table 1: Quantitative comparison between DCGAN and LR-GAN on CIFAR-10.

Training Data

Real Images

DCGAN

Ours

Inception Score†
Inception Score††
Adversarial Accuracy
Adversarial Divergence
†Evaluate using the pre-trained Inception net as Salimans et al. (2016)
††Evaluate using the supervisedly trained classiﬁer based on the discriminator in LR-GAN.

7.17±0.07
6.11±0.06
44.22 ±0.08
5.57±0.06

6.64±0.14
5.69±0.07
37.81±0.02
7.58±0.04

11.18±0.18
7.23±0.09
83.33±0.08
0

9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 9: Generation results of our model on CIFAR-10. From left to right, the blocks are: gener-
ated background images, foreground images, foreground masks, foreground images carved out by
masks, carved foregrounds after spatial transformation, ﬁnal composite images and nearest neighbor
training images to the generated images.

Figure 10: Category speciﬁc generation results of our model on CIFAR-10 categories of horse, frog,
and cat (top to bottom). The blocks from left to right are: generated background images, foreground
images, foreground masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved foregrounds after spatial
transformation and ﬁnal composite images.

based on DCGAN and LR-GAN, repsectively. We compute two types of Inception Scores. The
standard Inception Score is based on the Inception net as in Salimans et al. (2016), and the contex-
tual Inception Score is based on our trained classiﬁer model. To distinguish, we denote the standard
one as ‘Inception Score†’, and the contextual one as ‘Inception Score††’. To obtain the Adversarial
Accuracy and Adversarial Divergence scores, we train one generator on each of 10 categories for
DCGAN and LR-GAN, respectively. Then, we use these generators to generate samples of different
categories. Given these generated samples, we train the classiﬁers for DCGAN and LR-GAN sepa-
rately. Along with the classiﬁer trained on the real samples, we compute the Adversarial Accuracy

10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

and Adversarial Divergence on the real training samples. In Table 1, we report the Inception Scores,
Adversarial Accuracy and Adversarial Divergence for comparison. We can see that our model out-
performs DCGAN across the board. To point out, we obtan different Inception Scores based on
different classiﬁer models, which indicates that the Inception Score varies with different models.

Quantitative evaluation on discriminators: We evaluate the discriminator as an extractor for deep
representations. Speciﬁcally, we use the output of the last convolutional layer in the discriminator
as features. We perform a 1-NN classiﬁcation on the test set given the full training set. Cosine
similarity is used as the metric. On the test set, our model achieves 62.09%±0.01% compared to
DCGAN’s 56.05%±0.02%.

Contextual generation: We also show the efﬁcacy of our approach to generate diverse foregrounds
conditioned on ﬁxed background. The results in Fig. 17 in Appendix showcase that the foreground
generator generates objects that are compatible with the background. This indicates that the model
has captured contextual dependencies between the image layers.

Category speciﬁc models: The objects in CIFAR-10 exhibit huge variability in shapes. That can
partly explain why some of the generated shapes are not as compelling in Fig. 9. To test this hy-
pothesis, we reuse the generators trained for each of 10 categories used in our metrics to obtain the
generation results. Fig. 10 shows results for categories ‘horse’, ‘frog’ and ‘cat’. We can see that the
model is now able to generate object-speciﬁc appearances and shapes, similar in vein to our results
on the CUB-200 dataset.

5.5

IMPORTANCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS

Figure 11: Generation results from an ablated LR-GAN model without afﬁne transformations. From
top to bottom, the block rows correspond to different datasets: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10.
From left to right, the blocks show generated background images, foreground images, foreground
masks, and ﬁnal composite images. For comparison, the rightmost column block shows ﬁnal gener-
ated images from a non-ablated model with afﬁne transformations.

Fig. 11 shows results from an ablated model without afﬁne transformations in the foreground layers,
and compares the results with the full model that does include these transformations. We note that
one signiﬁcant problem emerges that the decompositions are degenerate, in the sense that the model
is unable to break the symmetry between foreground and background layers, often generating object
appearances in the model’s background layer and vice versa. For CUB-200, the ﬁnal generated im-
ages have some blendings between foregrounds and backgrounds. This is particularly the case for

11

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 12: Generation results from an ablated LR-GAN model without mask generator. The block
rows correspond to different datasets (from top to bottom: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10).
From left to right, the blocks show generated background images, foreground images, transformed
foreground images, and ﬁnal composite images. For comparison, the rightmost column block shows
ﬁnal generated images from a non-ablated model with mask generator.

those images without bird-shape masks. For CIFAR-10, a number of generated masks are inverted.
In this case, the background images are carved out as the foreground objects. The foreground gener-
ator takes almost all the duty to generate the ﬁnal images, which make it harder to generate images
as clear as the model with transformation. From these comparisons, we qualitatively demonstrate
the importance of modeling transformations in the foreground generation process. Another merit of
using transformation is that the intermediate outputs of the model are more interpretable and faciliate
to the downstreaming tasks, such as scene paring, which is demonstrated in Section 6.8.

5.6

IMPORTANCE OF SHAPES

We perform another ablation study by removing the mask generator to understand the importance
of modeling object shapes. In this case, the generated foreground is simply pasted on top of the
generated background after being transformed. There is no alpha blending between the foregrounds
and backgrounds. The generation results for three datasets, MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 are
shown in Fig. 12. As we can see, though the model works well for the generation of MNIST-ONE, it
fails to generate reasonable images across the other datasets. Particularly, the training does not even
converge for CUB-200. Based on these results, we qualitatively demonstrate that mask generator in
our model is fairly important to obtain plausible results, especially for realistic images.

REFERENCES

Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel.

Info-
gan: Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03657, 2016.

Trevor Darrell and Alex Pentland. Robust estimation of a multi-layered motion representation. IEEE

Workshop on Visual Motion, 1991.

12

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Emily L Denton, Soumith Chintala, Rob Fergus, et al. Deep generative image models using a
laplacian pyramid of adversarial networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
pp. 1486–1494, 2015.

S. M. Ali Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Geof-
frey E. Hinton. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with generative models. CoRR,
abs/1603.08575, 2016.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, pp. 2672–2680, 2014.

Karol Gregor, Ivo Danihelka, Alex Graves, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Draw: A

recurrent neural network for image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.046239, 2015.

Gary B. Huang, Manu Ramesh, Tamara Berg, and Erik Learned-Miller. Labeled faces in the wild:
A database for studying face recognition in unconstrained environments. Technical Report 07-49,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, October 2007.

Jonathan Huang and Kevin Murphy. Efﬁcient inference in occlusion-aware generative models of

images. CoRR, abs/1511.06362, 2015.

Daniel Jiwoong Im, Chris Dongjoo Kim, Hui Jiang, and Roland Memisevic. Generating images

with recurrent adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.05110, 2016.

Phillip Isola and Ce Liu. Scene collaging: Analysis and synthesis of natural images with semantic

layers. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3048–3055, 2013.

Max Jaderberg, Karen Simonyan, Andrew Zisserman, and koray kavukcuoglu. Spatial transformer
networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28, pp. 2017–2025, 2015.

Anitha Kannan, Nebojsa Jojic, and Brendan Frey. Generative model for layers of appearance and

deformation. AISTATS, 2005.

Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, and Max Welling. Improving variational inference with inverse

autoregressive ﬂow. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04934, 2016.

Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Hanock Kwak and Byoung-Tak Zhang. Generating images part by part with composite generative

adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05387, 2016.

Yann LeCun, L´eon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to

document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.

Elman Mansimov, Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Generating images

from captions with attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02793, 2015.

Javier Portilla and Eero P Simoncelli. A parametric texture model based on joint statistics of com-

plex wavelet coefﬁcients. International journal of computer vision, 40(1):49–70, 2000.

Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep

convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.

Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Santosh Mohan, Samuel Tenka, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee. Learn-

ing what and where to draw. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02454, 2016a.

Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee.

Generative adversarial text to image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.05396, 2016b.

Nicolas Le Roux, Nicolas Heess, Jamie Shotton, and John Winn. Learning a generative model of

images by factoring appearance and shape. Neural Computation, 23:593–650, 2011.

Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.

Improved techniques for training gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03498, 2016.

13

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

A¨aron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural networks.

CoRR, abs/1601.06759, 2016.

Carl Vondrick, Hamed Pirsiavash, and Antonio Torralba. Generating videos with scene dynamics.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02612, 2016.

John Wang and Edward Adelson. Representing moving images with layers. IEEE Transactions on

Image Processing, 1994.

Xiaolong Wang and Abhinav Gupta. Generative image modeling using style and structure adversar-

ial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.05631, 2016.

P. Welinder, S. Branson, T. Mita, C. Wah, F. Schroff, S. Belongie, and P. Perona. Caltech-UCSD

Birds 200. Technical Report CNS-TR-2010-001, California Institute of Technology, 2010.

Xinchen Yan, Jimei Yang, Kihyuk Sohn, and Honglak Lee. Attribute2image: Conditional image

generation from visual attributes. CoRR, abs/1512.00570, 2015.

Junbo Zhao, Michael Mathieu, and Yann LeCun. Energy-based generative adversarial network.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03126, 2016.

Jun-Yan Zhu, Philipp Kr¨ahenb¨uhl, Eli Shechtman, and Alexei A Efros. Generative visual manipu-
lation on the natural image manifold. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 597–613.
Springer, 2016.

6 APPENDIX

6.1 ALGORITHM

Algo. 1 illustrates the generative process in our model. g((cid:63)) evaluates the function g at (cid:63). ◦ is a
composition operator that composes its operands so that f ◦ g((cid:63)) = f (g((cid:63))).

(cid:46) background generator

(cid:46) pass through LSTM

Algorithm 1 Stochastic Layered Recursive Image Generation

l

])

, ct−1
l

l ← LSTM([zt, ht−1

zt ∼ N (0, I)
ht
l, ct
if t = 1 then
yt ← ht
l

1: z0 ∼ N (0, I)
2: x0 = Gb(z0)
3: h0
l ← 0
4: c0
l ← 0
5: for t ∈ [1 · · · T ] do
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16: mt ← Gm
ht
f ← Ec
17:
xt ← ST (mt, at) (cid:12) ST (ft, at) + (1 − ST (mt, at)) (cid:12) xt−1
18:
19: end for

end if
st ← Gc
f (yt)
at ← Tf (yt)
ft ← Gi
f (st)
f (st)
f ◦ P c

yt ← El

l ht−1

f ([ht

f (st)

else

])

f

(cid:46) pass through non-linear embedding layers El
f

(cid:46) predict shared cube for Gi

f and Gm
f
(cid:46) object transformation
(cid:46) generate object appearance
(cid:46) generate object shape
(cid:46) predict shared represenation embedding

6.2 MODEL CONFIGURATIONS

Table 2 lists the information and model conﬁguration for different datasets. The dimensions of
random vectors and hidden vectors are all set to 100. We also compare the number of parameters in
DCGAN and LR-GAN. The numbers before ‘/’ are our model, after ‘/’ are DCGAN. Based on the
same notation used in (Zhao et al., 2016), the architectures for the different datasets are:

14

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Table 2: Information and model conﬁgurations on different datasets.

Dataset

MNIST-ONE MNIST-TWO

CIFAR-10

CUB-200

Image Size
#Images
#Timesteps
#Parameters

32
60,000
2

64
60,000
3

32
50,000
2

64
5,994
2

5.25M/4.11M 7.53M/6.33M 5.26M/4.11M 27.3M/6.34M

• MNIST-ONE: Gb:

(256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc
f :

(512)4c-(256)4c2s-

(128)4c2s; Gi

f : (3)4c2s; Gm

f : (1)4c2s; D: (64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(256)4p4s-1

• MNIST-TWO: Gb:

(256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(32)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc
f :

(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s; Gi
f :
(256)4c2s-(512)4c2s-(512)4p4s-1

(3)4c2s; Gm
f :

(1)4c2s;D:

(512)4c-
(64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-

• CUB-200: Gb: (512)4c-(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc

(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s; Gi
f :
(1024)4c2s-(1024)4p4s-1

(3)4c2s; Gm
f :

(1)4c2s;D:

f : (1024)4c-(512)4c2s-
(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(512)4c2s-

• CIFAR-10: Gb: (256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc

f : (512)4c-(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s;

Gi

f : (3)4c2s; Gm

f : (1)4c2s D: (64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(256)4p4s-1

6.3 RESULTS ON MNIST-ONE

We conduct human studies on generation results on MNIST-ONE. Speciﬁcally, we generate 1,000
images using both LR-GAN and DCGAN. As references, we also include 1000 real images. Then
we ask the users on AMT to label each image to be one of the digits (0-9). We also provide them
an option ‘non recognizable’ in case the generated image does not seem to contain a digit. Each
image was judged by 5 unique workers. Similar to CIFAR-10, if an image is recognized to be the
same digit by all 5 users, it is assigned to quality level 5. If it is not recognizable according to all
users, it is assigned to quality level 0. Fig. 13 (left) shows the number of images assigned to all six
quality levels. Compared to DCGAN, our model generated more samples with high quality levels.
As expected, the real images have many samples with high quality levels. In Fig. 13 (right), we show
the number of images that are recognized to each digit category (0-9). For qualitative comparison,
we show examplar images at each quality level in Fig. 14. From left to right, the quality level
increases from 0 to 5. As expected, the images with higher quality level are more clear.

For quantitative evaluation, we use the same way as for CIFAR-10. The classiﬁer model used for
contextual Inception Score is trained based on the training set. We generate 60,000 samples based
on DCGAN and LR-GAN for evaluation, respectively. To obtain the Adversarial Accuracy and
Adversarial Divergence, we ﬁrst train 10 generators for 10 digit categories separately, and then use
the generated samples to train the classiﬁer. As shown in Table 3, our model has higher scores than
DCGAN on both standard and contextual Inception Score. Also, our model has a slightly higher

Figure 13: Statistics of annotations in human studies on MNIST-ONE. Left: distribution of quality
level; Right: distribution of recognized digit categories.

15

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 14: Qualitative comparison on MNIST-ONE. Top three rows are samples generated by DC-
GAN. Bottom three rows are samples generated by LR-GAN. The quality level increases from left
to right as determined via human studies.

Table 3: Quantitative comparison on MNIST-ONE.

Training Data

Real Images

DCGAN

Ours

Inception Score†
Inception Score††
Adversarial Accuracy
Adversarial Divergence Score
†Evaluate using the pre-trained Inception net as Salimans et al. (2016)
††Evaluate using the supervisedly trained classiﬁer based on the discriminator in LR-GAN.

2.03±0.01
6.42±0.03
26.12 ± 0.07
8.47 ± 0.03

1.83±0.01
9.15±0.04
95.22 ± 0.25
0

2.06±0.01
7.15±0.04
26.61 ± 0.06
8.39 ± 0.04

adversarial accuracy, and lower adversarial divergence than DCGAN. We ﬁnd that the all three
image sets have low standard Inception Scores. This is mainly because the Inception net is trained
on ImageNet, which has a very different data distribution from the MNIST dataset. Based on this,
we argue that the standard Inception Score is not suitable for some image datasets.

6.4 MORE RESULTS ON CUB-200

In this experiment, we reduce the minimal allowed object scale to 1.1, which allows the model to
generate larger foreground objects. The results are shown in Fig. 15. Similar to the results when the
constraint is 1.2, the crisp bird-like masks are generated automatically by our model.

Figure 15: Generation results of our model on CUB-200 when setting minimal allowed scale to
1.1. From left to right, the blocks show the generated background images, foreground images,
foreground masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved foreground images after spatial
transformation. The sixth and seventh blocks are ﬁnal composite images and the nearest neighbor
real images.

16

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

6.5 MORE RESULTS ON CIFAR-10

6.5.1 QUALITATIVE RESULTS

In Fig. 16, we show more results on CIFAR-10 when setting minimal allowed object scale to 1.1.
The rightmost column block also shows the training images that are closest to the generated images
(cosine similarity in pixel space). We can see our model does not memorize the training data.

Figure 16: Generation results of our model on CIFAR-10 with minimal allowed scale be 1.1, From
left to right, the layout is same to Fig. 15.

6.5.2 WALKING IN THE LATENT SPACE

Similar to DCGAN, we also show results by walking in the latent space. Note that our model has
two or more inputs. So we can walk along any of them or their combination. In Fig. 17, we generate
multiple foregrounds for the same ﬁxed generated background. We ﬁnd that our model consistently
generates contextually compatible foregrounds. For example, for the grass-like backgrounds, the
foreground generator generates horses and deer, and airplane-like objects for the blue sky.

6.5.3 WORD CLOUD BASED ON HUMAN STUDY

As we mentioned above, we conducted human studies on CIFAR-10. Besides asking people to select
a name from a list for an image, we also conducted another human study where we ask people to use
one word (free-form) to describe the main object in the image. Each image was ‘named’ by 5 unique
people. We generate word clouds for real images, images generated by DCGAN and LR-GAN, as
shown in Fig. 18.

6.6 RESULTS ON LFW FACE DATASET

We conduct experiment on face images in LFW dataset (Huang et al., 2007). Different from previous
works which work on cropped and aligned faces, we directly generate the original images which
contains a large portion of backgrounds. This conﬁguration helps to verify the efﬁciency of LR-GAN
to model the object appearance, shape and pose. In Fig. 19, we show the (intermediate) generation
results of LR-GAN. Surprisingly, without any supervisions, the model generated background and
faces in separate steps, and the generated masks accurately depict face shapes. Moreover, the model

17

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 17: Walking in the latent foreground space by ﬁxing backgrounds in our model on CIFAR-
10. From left to right, the blocks are: generated background images, foreground images, foreground
masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved out foreground images after spatial transfor-
mation, and ﬁnal composite images. Each row has the same background, but different foregrounds.

Figure 18: Statistics of annotations in human studies on CIFAR-10. Left to right: word cloud for
real images, images generated by DCGAN, images generated by LR-GAN.

Figure 19: Generation results of our model on LFW. From left to right, the blocks are: generated
background images, foreground images, foreground masks, carved out foreground images after spa-
tial transformation, and ﬁnal composite images.

learns where to place the generated faces so that the whole image looks natural. For comparison,

18

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

please refer to (Kwak & Zhang, 2016) which does not model the transformation. We can ﬁnd the
generation results degrade much.

6.7 STATISTICS ON TRANSFORMATION MATRICES

In this part, we analyze the statistics on the transformation matrices generated by our model for
different datasets, including MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 and LFW. We used afﬁne transfor-
mation in our model. So there are 6 parameters, scaling in the x coordinate (sx), scaling in the y
coordinate (sy), translation in the x coordinate (tx), translation in the y coordinate (ty), rotation in
the x coordinate (rx) and rotation in the y coordinate (ry). In Fig. 20, we show the histograms on dif-
ferent parameters for different datasets.These histograms show that the model produces non-trivial
varied scaling, translation and rotation on all datasets. For different datasets, the learned transfor-
mation have different patterns. We hypothesize that this is mainly determined by the conﬁgurations
of objects in the images. For example, on MNIST-ONE, all six parameters have some ﬂuctuations
since the synthetic dataset contains digits randomly placed at different locations. For the other three
datasets, the scalings converge to single value since the object sizes do not vary much, and the vari-
ations on rotation and translation sufﬁce to generate realistic images. Speciﬁcally, we can ﬁnd the
generator largely relies on the translation on x coordinate for generating CUB-200. This makes
sense since birds in the images have similar scales, orientations but various horizontal locations. For
CIFAR-10, since there are 10 different object categories, the conﬁgurations are more diverse, hence
the generator uses all parameters for generation except for the scaling. For LFW, since faces have
similar conﬁgurations, the learned transformations have less ﬂuctuation as well. As a result, we can
see that LR-GAN indeed models the transformations on the foreground to generate images.

6.8 CONDITIONAL IMAGE GENERATION

Considering our model can generate object-like masks (shapes) for images, we conducted an ex-
periment to evaluate whether our model can be potentially used for image segmentation and object
detection. We make some changes to the model. For the background generator, the input is a real
image instead of a random vector. Then the image is passed through an encoder to extract the hid-
den features, which replaces the random vector z0 and are fed to the background generator. For the
foreground generator, we subtract the image generated by the background generator from the input
image to obtain a residual image. Then this residual image is fed to the same encoder to get the
hidden features, which are used as the input for foreground generator. In our conditional model,
we want to reconstruct the image, so we add a reconstruction loss along with the adversarial loss.
We train this conditional model on CIFAR-10. The (intermediate) outputs of the model is shown
in Fig. 21. Interestingly, the model successfully learned to decompose the input images into back-
ground and foreground. The background generator tends to do an image inpainting by generating a
complete background without object, while the foreground generator works as a segmentation model
to get object mask from the input image.

Similarly, we also run the conditional LR-GAN on LFW dataset. As we can see in Fig. 22, the fore-
ground generator automatically and consistently learned to generate the face regions, even though
there are large portion of background in the input images. In other words, the conditional LR-GAN
successfully learned to detection faces in images. We suspect this success is due to that it has low
cost for the generator to generate similar images, and thus converge to the case that the ﬁrst generator
generate background, and the second generator generate face images.

Based on these experiments, we argue that our model can be possibly used for image segmentation
and object detection in a generative and unsupervised manner. One future work would be verifying
this by applying it to high-resolution and more complicate datasets.

19

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 20: Histograms of transformation parameters learnt in our model for different datasets. From
left to right, the datasets are: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 and LFW. From top to bottom,
they are scaling sx, sy, translation tx, ty, and rotation rx, ry in x and y coordinate, respectively.

20

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 21: Conditional generation results of our model on CIFAR-10. From left to right, the blocks
are: real images, generated background images, foreground images, foreground masks, foreground
images carved out by masks, carved foreground images after spatial transformation, and ﬁnal com-
posite (reconstructed) images.

Figure 22: Conditional generation results of our model on LFW, displayed with the same layout to
Fig. 21.

21

7
1
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
0
6
5
1
0
.
3
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

LR-GAN: LAYERED RECURSIVE GENERATIVE AD-
VERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR IMAGE GENERATION

Jianwei Yang∗
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
jw2yang@vt.edu

Anitha Kannan
Facebook AI Research
Menlo Park, CA
akannan@fb.com

Dhruv Batra∗and Devi Parikh∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA
{dbatra, parikh}@gatech.edu

ABSTRACT

We present LR-GAN: an adversarial image generation model which takes scene
structure and context into account. Unlike previous generative adversarial net-
works (GANs), the proposed GAN learns to generate image background and fore-
grounds separately and recursively, and stitch the foregrounds on the background
in a contextually relevant manner to produce a complete natural image. For each
foreground, the model learns to generate its appearance, shape and pose. The
whole model is unsupervised, and is trained in an end-to-end manner with gradient
descent methods. The experiments demonstrate that LR-GAN can generate more
natural images with objects that are more human recognizable than DCGAN. The
code is available at https://github.com/jwyang/lr-gan.pytorch.

1

INTRODUCTION

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) have shown signiﬁcant promise
as generative models for natural images. A ﬂurry of recent work has proposed improvements over
the original GAN work for image generation (Radford et al., 2015; Denton et al., 2015; Salimans
et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2016), multi-stage image generation
including part-based models (Im et al., 2016; Kwak & Zhang, 2016), image generation conditioned
on input text or attributes (Mansimov et al., 2015; Reed et al., 2016b;a), image generation based on
3D structure (Wang & Gupta, 2016), and even video generation (Vondrick et al., 2016).

While the holistic ‘gist’ of images generated by these approaches is beginning to look natural, there
is clearly a long way to go. For instance, the foreground objects in these images tend to be deformed,
blended into the background, and not look realistic or recognizable.

One fundamental limitation of these methods is that they attempt to generate images without taking
into account that images are 2D projections of a 3D visual world, which has a lot of structures in it.
This manifests as structure in the 2D images that capture this world. One example of this structure
is that images tend to have a background, and foreground objects are placed in this background in
contextually relevant ways.

We develop a GAN model that explicitly encodes this structure. Our proposed model generates im-
ages in a recursive fashion: it ﬁrst generates a background, and then conditioned on the background
generates a foreground along with a shape (mask) and a pose (afﬁne transformation) that together
deﬁne how the background and foreground should be composed to obtain a complete image. Condi-
tioned on this composite image, a second foreground and an associated shape and pose are generated,
and so on. As a byproduct in the course of recursive image generation, our approach generates some
object-shape foreground-background masks in a completely unsupervised way, without access to
any object masks for training. Note that decomposing a scene into foreground-background layers is
a classical ill-posed problem in computer vision. By explicitly factorizing appearance and transfor-
mation, LR-GAN encodes natural priors about the images that the same foreground can be ‘pasted’
to the different backgrounds, under different afﬁne transformations. According to the experiments,
the absence of these priors result in degenerate foreground-background decompositions, and thus
also degenerate ﬁnal composite images.

∗Work was done while visiting Facebook AI Research.

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 1: Generation results of our model on CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). It generates images
in two timesteps. At the ﬁrst timestep, it generates background images, while generates foreground
images, masks and transformations at the second timestep. Then, they are composed to obtain the
ﬁnal images. From top left to bottom right (row major), the blocks are real images, generated
background images, foreground images, foreground masks, carved foreground images, carved and
transformed foreground images, ﬁnal composite images, and their nearest neighbor real images in
the training set. Note that the model is trained in a completely unsupervised manner.

We mainly evaluate our approach on four datasets: MNIST-ONE (one digit) and MNIST-TWO (two
digits) synthesized from MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) and
CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). We show qualitatively (via samples) and quantitatively (via evalu-
ation metrics and human studies on Amazon Mechanical Turk) that LR-GAN generates images that
globally look natural and contain clear background and object structures in them that are realistic
and recognizable by humans as semantic entities. An experimental snapshot on CUB-200 is shown
in Fig. 1. We also ﬁnd that LR-GAN generates foreground objects that are contextually relevant to
the backgrounds (e.g., horses on grass, airplanes in skies, ships in water, cars on streets, etc.). For
quantitative comparison, besides existing metrics in the literature, we propose two new quantitative
metrics to evaluate the quality of generated images. The proposed metrics are derived from the sufﬁ-
cient conditions for the closeness between generated image distribution and real image distribution,
and thus supplement existing metrics.

2 RELATED WORK

Early work in parametric texture synthesis was based on a set of hand-crafted features (Portilla &
Simoncelli, 2000). Recent improvements in image generation using deep neural networks mainly
fall into one of the two stochastic models: variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma et al., 2016)
and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). VAEs pair a top-down prob-
abilistic generative network with a bottom up recognition network for amortized probabilistic infer-
ence. Two networks are jointly trained to maximize a variational lower bound on the data likelihood.
GANs consist of a generator and a discriminator in a minmax game with the generator aiming to
fool the discriminator with its samples with the latter aiming to not get fooled.

Sequential models have been pivotal for improved image generation using variational autoencoders:
DRAW (Gregor et al., 2015) uses attention based recurrence conditioning on the canvas drawn so
far. In Eslami et al. (2016), a recurrent generative model that draws one object at a time to the
canvas was used as the decoder in VAE. These methods are yet to show scalability to natural images.
Early compelling results using GANs used sequential coarse-to-ﬁne multiscale generation and class-
conditioning (Denton et al., 2015). Since then, improved training schemes (Salimans et al., 2016)
and better convolutional structure (Radford et al., 2015) have improved the generation results using

2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

GANs. PixelRNN (van den Oord et al., 2016) is also recently proposed to sequentially generates a
pixel at a time, along the two spatial dimensions.

In this paper, we combine the merits of sequential generation with the ﬂexibility of GANs. Our
model for sequential generation imbibes a recursive structure that more naturally mimics image
composition by inferring three components: appearance, shape, and pose. One closely related work
combining recursive structure with GAN is that of Im et al. (2016) but it does not explicitly model
object composition and follows a similar paradigm as by Gregor et al. (2015). Another closely re-
lated work is that of Kwak & Zhang (2016). It combines recursive structure and alpha blending.
However, our work differs in three main ways: (1) We explicitly use a generator for modeling the
foreground poses. That provides signiﬁcant advantage for natural images, as shown by our ablation
studies; (2) Our shape generator is separate from the appearance generator. This factored repre-
sentation allows more ﬂexibility in the generated scenes; (3) Our recursive framework generates
subsequent objects conditioned on the current and previous hidden vectors, and previously gener-
ated object. This allows for explicit contextual modeling among generated elements in the scene.
See Fig. 17 for contextually relevant foregrounds generated for the same background, or Fig. 6 for
meaningful placement of two MNIST digits relative to each.

Models that provide supervision to image generation using conditioning variables have also been
proposed: Style/Structure GANs (Wang & Gupta, 2016) learns separate generative models for style
and structure that are then composed to obtain ﬁnal images. In Reed et al. (2016a), GAN based
image generation is conditioned on text and the region in the image where the text manifests, spec-
iﬁed during training via keypoints or bounding boxes. While not the focus of our work, the model
proposed in this paper can be easily extended to take into account these forms of supervision.

3 PRELIMINARIES

3.1 GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) consist of a generator G and a discriminator D that are
simultaneously trained with competing goals: The generator G is trained to generate samples that
can ‘fool’ a discriminator D, while the discriminator is trained to classify its inputs as either real
(coming from the training dataset) or fake (coming from the samples of G). This competition leads
to a minmax formulation with a value function:

Ex∼pdata(x)[log(D(x; θD))] + Ez∼pz(z)[log(1 − D(G(z; θG); θD))]

(1)

(cid:17)

,

(cid:16)

min
θG

max
θD

where z is a random vector from a standard multivariate Gaussian or a uniform distribution pz(z),
G(z; θG) maps z to the data space, D(x) is the probability that x is real estimated by D. The
advantage of the GANs formulation is that it lacks an explicit loss function and instead uses the
discriminator to optimize the generative model. The discriminator, in turn, only cares whether the
sample it receives is on the data manifold, and not whether it exactly matches a particular training
example (as opposed to losses such as MSE). Hence, the discriminator provides a gradient signal
only when the generated samples do not lie on the data manifold so that the generator can readjust
its parameters accordingly. This form of training enables learning the data manifold of the training
set and not just optimizing to reconstruct the dataset, as in autoencoder and its variants.

While the GANs framework is largely agnostic to the choice of G and D, it is clear that generative
models with the ‘right’ inductive biases will be more effective in learning from the gradient infor-
mation (Denton et al., 2015; Im et al., 2016; Gregor et al., 2015; Reed et al., 2016a; Yan et al., 2015).
With this motivation, we propose a generator that models image generation via a recurrent process
– in each time step of the recurrence, an object with its own appearance and shape is generated and
warped according to a generated pose to compose an image in layers.

3.2 LAYERED STRUCTURE OF IMAGE

An image taken of our 3D world typically contains a layered structure. One way of representing an
image layer is by its appearance and shape. As an example, an image x with two layers, foreground
f and background b may be factorized as:

x = f (cid:12) m + b (cid:12) (1 − m),

(2)

3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

where m is the mask depicting the shapes of image layers, and (cid:12) the element wise multiplication
operator. Some existing methods assume the access to the shape of the object either during training
(Isola & Liu, 2013) or both at train and test time (Reed et al., 2016a; Yan et al., 2015). Representing
images in layered structure is even straightforward for video with moving objects (Darrell & Pent-
land, 1991; Wang & Adelson, 1994; Kannan et al., 2005). Vondrick et al. (2016) generates videos
by separately generating a ﬁxed background and moving foregrounds. A similar way of generating
single image can be found in Kwak & Zhang (2016).

Another way is modeling the layered structure with object appearance and pose as:

x = ST (f , a) + b,

(3)

where f and b are foreground and background, respectively; a is the afﬁne transformation; ST is
the spatial transformation operator. Several works fall into this group (Roux et al., 2011; Huang &
Murphy, 2015; Eslami et al., 2016). In Huang & Murphy (2015), images are decomposed into layers
of objects with speciﬁc poses in a variational autoencoder framework, while the number of objects
(i.e., layers) is adaptively estimated in Eslami et al. (2016).

To contrast with these works, LR-GAN uses a layered composition, and the foreground layers si-
multaneously model all three dominant factors of variation: appearance f , shape m and pose a. We
will elaborate it in the following section.

4 LAYERED RECURSIVE GAN (LR-GAN)

The basic structure of LR-GAN is similar to GAN: it consists of a discriminator and a generator that
are simultaneously trained using the minmax formulation of GAN, as described in §.3.1. The key
innovation of our work is the layered recursive generator, which is what we describe in this section.

The generator in LR-GAN is recursive in that the image is constructed recursively using a recurrent
network. Layered in that each recursive step composes an object layer that is ‘pasted’ on the image
generated so far. Object layer at timestep t is parameterized by the following three constituents –
‘canonical’ appearance ft, shape (or mask) mt, and pose (or afﬁne transformation) at for warping
the object before pasting in the image composition.

Fig. 2 shows the architecture of the LR-GAN with the generator architecture unrolled for generating
.
background x0 (
= xb) and foreground x1 and x2. At each time step t, the generator composes the
next image xt via the following recursive computation:

xt = ST (mt, at)
(cid:125)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
afﬁne transformed mask

(cid:124)

(cid:12)

ST (ft, at)
(cid:125)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
(cid:124)
afﬁne transformed appearance

,
+ (1 − ST (mt, at)) (cid:12) xt−1
(cid:125)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
pasting on image composed so far

(cid:124)

∀t ∈ [1, T ]

(4)

where ST ((cid:5), at) is a spatial transformation operator that outputs the afﬁne transformed version of
(cid:5) with at indicating parameters of the afﬁne transformation.

Since our proposed model has an explicit transformation variable at that is used to warp the object,
it can learn a canonical object representation that can be re-used to generate scenes where the ob-
ject occurs as mere transformations of it, such as different scales or rotations. By factorizing the
appearance, shape and pose, the object generator can focus on separately capturing regularities in
these three factors that constitute an object. We will demonstrate in our experiments that removing
these factorizations from the model leads to its spending capacity in variability that may not solely
be about the object in Section 5.5 and 5.6.

4.1 DETAILS OF GENERATOR ARCHITECTURE

Fig. 2 shows our LR-GAN architecture in detail – we use different shapes to indicate different kinds
of layers (convolutional, fractional convolutional, (non)linear, etc), as indicated by the legend. Our
model consists of two main pieces – a background generator Gb and a foreground generator Gf . Gb
and Gf do not share parameters with each other. Gb computation happens only once, while Gf is
recurrent over time, i.e., all object generators share the same parameters. In the following, we will
introduce each module and connections between them.

Temporal Connections. LR-GAN has two kinds of temporal connections – informally speaking,
one on ‘top’ and one on ‘bottom’. The ‘top’ connections perform the act of sequentially ‘pasting’

4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 2: LR-GAN architecture unfolded to three timesteps. It mainly consists of one background
generator, one foreground generator, temporal connections and one discriminator. The meaning of
each component is explained in the legend.

object layers (Eqn. 4). The ‘bottom’ connections are constructed by a LSTM on the noise vectors
z0, z1, z2. Intuitively, this noise-vector-LSTM provides information to the foreground generator
about what else has been generated in past. Besides, when generating multiple objects, we use a
pooling layer P c
f to extract the information from previous generated
object response map. By this way, the model is able to ‘see’ previously generated objects.

f and a fully-connected layer Ec

Background Generator. The background generator Gb is purposely kept simple. It takes the hidden
state of noise-vector-LSTM h0
l as the input and passes it to a number of fractional convolutional
layers (also called ‘deconvolution’ layer in some papers) to generate images at its end. The output
of background generator xb will be used as the canvas for the following generated foregrounds.

f . Gi

f and Gm

Foreground Generator. The foreground generator Gf is used to generate an object with appearance
and shape. Correspondingly, Gf consists of three sub-modules, Gc
f , which is a common ‘trunk’
whose outputs are shared by Gi
f is used to generate the foreground appearance ft,
while Gm
f generates the mask mt for the foreground. All three sub-modules consists of one or
more fractional convolutional layers combined with batch-normalization and nonlinear layers. The
generated foreground appearance and mask have the same spatial size as the background. The top
of Gm
f is a sigmoid layer in order to generate one channel mask whose values range in (0, 1).
Spatial Transformer. To spatially transform foreground objects, we need to estimate the trans-
formation matrix. As in Jaderberg et al. (2015), we predict the afﬁne transformation matrix with a
linear layer Tf that has six-dimensional outputs. Then based on the predicted transformation matrix,
we use a grid generator Gg to generate the corresponding sampling coordinates in the input for each
location at the output. The generated foreground appearance and mask share the same transforma-
tion matrix, and thus the same sampling grid. Given the grid, the sampler S will simultaneously
sample the ft and mt to obtain ˆft and ˆmt, respectively. Different from Jaderberg et al. (2015),
our sampler here normally performs downsampling, since the the foreground typically has smaller
size than the background. Pixels in ˆft and ˆmt that are from outside the extent of ft and mt are set
to zero. Finally, ˆft and ˆmt are sent to the compositor C which combines the canvas xt−1 and ˆft
through layered composition with blending weights given by ˆmt (Eqn. 4).

Pseudo-code for our approach and detailed model conﬁguration are provided in the Appendix.

5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

4.2 NEW EVALUATION METRICS

Several metrics have been proposed to evaluate GANs, such as Gaussian parzen window (Good-
fellow et al., 2014), Generative Adversarial Metric (GAM) (Im et al., 2016) and Inception Score
(Salimans et al., 2016). The common goal is to measure the similarity between the generated data
distribution Pg(x) = G(z; θz) and the real data distribution P (x). Most recently, Inception Score
has been used in several works (Salimans et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2016). However, it is an assymetric
metric and could be easily fooled by generating centers of data modes.

In addition to these metrics, we present two new metrics based on the following intuition – a suf-
ﬁcient (but not necessary) condition for closeness of Pg(x) and P (x) is closeness of Pg(x|y) and
P (x|y), i.e., distributions of generated data and real data conditioned on all possible variables of
interest y, e.g., category label. One way to obtain this variable of interest y is via human annotation.
Speciﬁcally, given the data sampled from Pg(x) and P (x), we ask people to label the category of the
samples according to some rules. Note that such human annotation is often easier than comparing
samples from the two distributions (e.g., because there is no 1:1 correspondence between samples
to conduct forced-choice tests).

After the annotations, we need to verify whether the two distributions are similar in each category.
Clearly, directly comparing the distributions Pg(x|y) and P (x|y) may be as difﬁcult as compar-
ing Pg(x) and P (x). Fortunately, we can use Bayes rule and alternatively compare Pg(y|x) and
P (y|x), which is a much easier task. In this case, we can simply train a discriminative model on
the samples from Pg(x) and P (x) together with the human annotations about categories of these
samples. With a slight abuse of notation, we use Pg(y|x) and P (y|x) to denote probability outputs
from these two classiﬁers (trained on generated samples vs trained on real samples). We can then
use these two classiﬁers to compute the following two evaluation metrics:

Adversarial Accuracy: Computes the classiﬁcation accuracies achieved by these two classiﬁers on
a validation set, which can be the training set or another set of real images sampled from P (x). If
Pg(x) is close to P (x), we expect to see similar accuracies.

Adversarial Divergence: Computes the KL divergence between Pg(y|x) and P (y|x). The lower
the adversarial divergence, the closer two distributions are. The low bound for this metric is exactly
zero, which means Pg(y|x) = P (y|x) for all samples in the validation set.

As discussed above, we need human efforts to label the real and generated samples. Fortunately, we
can further simplify this. Based on the labels given on training data, we split the training data into
categories, and train one generator for each category. With all these generators, we generate samples
of all categories. This strategy will be used in our experiments on the datasets with labels given.

5 EXPERIMENT

We conduct qualitative and quantitative evaluations on three datasets: 1) MNIST (LeCun et al.,
1998); 2) CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009); 3) CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). To add
variability to the MNIST images, we randomly scale (factor of 0.8 to 1.2) and rotate (− π
4 ) the
digits and then stitch them to 48 × 48 uniform backgrounds with random grayscale value between
[0, 200]. Images are then rescaled back to 32 × 32. Each image thus has a different background
grayscale value and a different transformed digit as foreground. We rename this sythensized dataset
as MNIST-ONE (single digit on a gray background). We also synthesize a dataset MNIST-TWO
containing two digits on a grayscale background. We randomly select two images of digits and
perform similar transformations as described above, and put one on the left and the other on the
right side of a 78 × 78 gray background. We resize the whole image to 64 × 64.

4 to π

We develop LR-GAN based on open source code1. We assume the number of objects is known.
Therefore, for MNIST-ONE, MNIST-TWO, CIFAR-10, and CUB-200, our model has two, three,
two, and two timesteps, respectively. Since the size of foreground object should be smaller than
that of canvas, we set the minimal allowed scale 2 in afﬁne transforamtion to be 1.2 for all datasets
except for MNIST-TWO, which is set to 2 (objects are smaller in MNIST-TWO). In LR-GAN, the

1https://github.com/soumith/dcgan.torch
2Scale corresponds to the size of the target canvas with respect to the object – the larger the scale, the larger

the canvas, and the smaller the relative size of the object in the canvas. 1 means the same size as the canvas.

6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 3: Generated images on CIFAR-10 based on our model.

Figure 4: Generated images on CUB-200 based on our model.

background generator and foreground generator have similar architectures. One difference is that
the number of channels in the background generator is half of the one in the foreground generator.
We compare our results to that of DCGAN (Radford et al., 2015). Note that LR-GAN without
LSTM at the ﬁrst timestep corresponds exactly to the DCGAN. This allows us to run controlled
experiments. In both generator and discriminator, all the (fractional) convolutional layers have 4 ×
4 ﬁlter size with stride 2. As a result, the number of layers in the generator and discriminator
automatically adapt to the size of training images. Please see the Appendix (Section 6.2) for details
about the conﬁgurations. We use three metrics for quantitative evaluation, including Inception Score
(Salimans et al., 2016) and the proposed Adversarial Accuracy, Adversarial Divergence. Note that
we report two versions of Inception Score. One is based on the pre-trained Inception net, and the
other one is based on the pre-trained classiﬁer on the target datasets.

5.1 QUALITATIVE RESULTS

In Fig. 3 and 4, we show the generated samples for CIFAR-10 and CUB-200, respectively. MNIST
results are shown in the next subsection. As we can see from the images, the compositional nature
of our model results in the images being free of blending artifacts between backgrounds and fore-
grounds. For CIFAR-10, we can see the horses and cars with clear shapes. For CUB-200, the bird
shapes tend to be even sharper.

5.2 MNIST-ONE AND MNIST-TWO

We now report the results on MNIST-ONE and MNIST-TWO. Fig. 5 shows the generation results of
our model on MNIST-ONE. As we can see, our model generates the background and the foreground
in separate timestep, and can disentagle the foreground digits from background nearly perfectly.
Though initial values of the mask randomly distribute in the range of (0, 1), after training, the masks
are nearly binary and accurately carve out the digits from the generated foreground. More results on
MNIST-ONE (including human studies) can be found in the Appendix (Section 6.3).

Fig. 6 shows the generation results for MNIST-TWO. Similarly, the model is also able to generate
background and the two foreground objects separately. The foreground generator tends to generate
a single digit at each timestep. Meanwhile, it captures the context information from the previous
time steps. When the ﬁrst digit is placed to the left side, the second one tends to be placed on the
right side, and vice versa.

7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 5: Generation results of our model on MNIST-ONE. From left to right, the image blocks are
real images, generated background images, generated foreground images, generated masks and ﬁnal
composite images, respectively.

Figure 6: Generation results of our model on MNIST-TWO. From top left to bottom right (row
major), the image blocks are real images, generated background images, foreground images and
masks at the second timestep, composite images at the second time step, generated foreground
images and masks at the third timestep and the ﬁnal composite images, respectively.

5.3 CUB-200

We study the effectiveness of our model trained on the CUB-200 bird dataset. In Fig. 1, we have
shown a random set of generated images, along with the intermediate generation results of the model.
While being completely unsupervised, the model, for a large fraction of the samples, is able to

Figure 7: Matched pairs of generated images based on DCGAN and LR-GAN, respectivedly. The
odd columns are generated by DCGAN, and the even columns are generated by LR-GAN. These
are paired according to the perfect matching based on Hungarian algorithm.

8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 8: Qualitative comparison on CIFAR-10. Top three rows are images generated by DCGAN;
Bottom three rows are by LR-GAN. From left to right, the blocks display generated images with
increasing quality level as determined by human studies.

successfully disentangle the foreground and the background. This is evident from the generated
bird-like masks.

We do a comparative study based on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) between DCGAN and LR-
GAN to quantify relative visual quality of the generated images. We ﬁrst generated 1000 samples
from both the models. Then, we performed perfect matching between the two image sets using
the Hungarian algorithm on L2 norm distance in the pixel space. This resulted in 1000 image
pairs. Some examplar pairs are shown in Fig. 7. For each image pair, 9 judges are asked to choose
the one that is more realistic. Based on majority voting, we ﬁnd that our generated images are
selected 68.4% times, compared with 31.6% times for DCGAN. This demonstrates that our model
has generated more realistic images than DCGAN. We can attribute this difference to our model’s
ability to generate foreground separately from the background, enabling stronger edge cues.

5.4 CIFAR-10

We now qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate our model on CIFAR-10, which contains multiple
object categories and also various backgrounds.

Comparison of image generation quality: We conduct AMT studies to compare the ﬁdelity of
image generation. Towards this goal, we generate 1000 images from DCGAN and LR-GAN, re-
spectively. We ask 5 judges to label each image to either belong to one of the 10 categories or as
‘non recognizable’ or ‘recognizable but not belonging to the listed categories’. We then assign each
image a quality level between [0,5] that captures the number of judges that agree with the majority
choice. Fig. 8 shows the images generated by both approaches, ordered by increasing quality level.
We merge images at quality level 0 (all judges said non-recognizable) and 1 together, and similarly
images at level 4 and 5. Visually, the generated samples by our model have clearer boundaries and
object structures. We also computed the fraction of non-recognizable images: Our model had a 10%
absolute drop in non-recognizability rate (67.3% for ours vs. 77.7% for DCGAN). For reference,
11.4% of real CIFAR images were categorized as non-recognizable. Fig. 9 shows more generated
(intermediate) results of our model.

Quantitative evaluation on generators: We evaluate the generators based on three metrics: 1)
Inception Score; 2) Adversarial Accuracy; 3) Adversarial Divergence. To obtain a classiﬁer model
for evaluation, we remove the top layer in the discriminator used in our model, and then append
two fully connected layers on the top of it. We train this classiﬁer using the training samples of
CIFAR-10 based on the annotations. Following Salimans et al. (2016), we generated 50,000 images

Table 1: Quantitative comparison between DCGAN and LR-GAN on CIFAR-10.

Training Data

Real Images

DCGAN

Ours

Inception Score†
Inception Score††
Adversarial Accuracy
Adversarial Divergence
†Evaluate using the pre-trained Inception net as Salimans et al. (2016)
††Evaluate using the supervisedly trained classiﬁer based on the discriminator in LR-GAN.

7.17±0.07
6.11±0.06
44.22 ±0.08
5.57±0.06

6.64±0.14
5.69±0.07
37.81±0.02
7.58±0.04

11.18±0.18
7.23±0.09
83.33±0.08
0

9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 9: Generation results of our model on CIFAR-10. From left to right, the blocks are: gener-
ated background images, foreground images, foreground masks, foreground images carved out by
masks, carved foregrounds after spatial transformation, ﬁnal composite images and nearest neighbor
training images to the generated images.

Figure 10: Category speciﬁc generation results of our model on CIFAR-10 categories of horse, frog,
and cat (top to bottom). The blocks from left to right are: generated background images, foreground
images, foreground masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved foregrounds after spatial
transformation and ﬁnal composite images.

based on DCGAN and LR-GAN, repsectively. We compute two types of Inception Scores. The
standard Inception Score is based on the Inception net as in Salimans et al. (2016), and the contex-
tual Inception Score is based on our trained classiﬁer model. To distinguish, we denote the standard
one as ‘Inception Score†’, and the contextual one as ‘Inception Score††’. To obtain the Adversarial
Accuracy and Adversarial Divergence scores, we train one generator on each of 10 categories for
DCGAN and LR-GAN, respectively. Then, we use these generators to generate samples of different
categories. Given these generated samples, we train the classiﬁers for DCGAN and LR-GAN sepa-
rately. Along with the classiﬁer trained on the real samples, we compute the Adversarial Accuracy

10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

and Adversarial Divergence on the real training samples. In Table 1, we report the Inception Scores,
Adversarial Accuracy and Adversarial Divergence for comparison. We can see that our model out-
performs DCGAN across the board. To point out, we obtan different Inception Scores based on
different classiﬁer models, which indicates that the Inception Score varies with different models.

Quantitative evaluation on discriminators: We evaluate the discriminator as an extractor for deep
representations. Speciﬁcally, we use the output of the last convolutional layer in the discriminator
as features. We perform a 1-NN classiﬁcation on the test set given the full training set. Cosine
similarity is used as the metric. On the test set, our model achieves 62.09%±0.01% compared to
DCGAN’s 56.05%±0.02%.

Contextual generation: We also show the efﬁcacy of our approach to generate diverse foregrounds
conditioned on ﬁxed background. The results in Fig. 17 in Appendix showcase that the foreground
generator generates objects that are compatible with the background. This indicates that the model
has captured contextual dependencies between the image layers.

Category speciﬁc models: The objects in CIFAR-10 exhibit huge variability in shapes. That can
partly explain why some of the generated shapes are not as compelling in Fig. 9. To test this hy-
pothesis, we reuse the generators trained for each of 10 categories used in our metrics to obtain the
generation results. Fig. 10 shows results for categories ‘horse’, ‘frog’ and ‘cat’. We can see that the
model is now able to generate object-speciﬁc appearances and shapes, similar in vein to our results
on the CUB-200 dataset.

5.5

IMPORTANCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS

Figure 11: Generation results from an ablated LR-GAN model without afﬁne transformations. From
top to bottom, the block rows correspond to different datasets: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10.
From left to right, the blocks show generated background images, foreground images, foreground
masks, and ﬁnal composite images. For comparison, the rightmost column block shows ﬁnal gener-
ated images from a non-ablated model with afﬁne transformations.

Fig. 11 shows results from an ablated model without afﬁne transformations in the foreground layers,
and compares the results with the full model that does include these transformations. We note that
one signiﬁcant problem emerges that the decompositions are degenerate, in the sense that the model
is unable to break the symmetry between foreground and background layers, often generating object
appearances in the model’s background layer and vice versa. For CUB-200, the ﬁnal generated im-
ages have some blendings between foregrounds and backgrounds. This is particularly the case for

11

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 12: Generation results from an ablated LR-GAN model without mask generator. The block
rows correspond to different datasets (from top to bottom: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10).
From left to right, the blocks show generated background images, foreground images, transformed
foreground images, and ﬁnal composite images. For comparison, the rightmost column block shows
ﬁnal generated images from a non-ablated model with mask generator.

those images without bird-shape masks. For CIFAR-10, a number of generated masks are inverted.
In this case, the background images are carved out as the foreground objects. The foreground gener-
ator takes almost all the duty to generate the ﬁnal images, which make it harder to generate images
as clear as the model with transformation. From these comparisons, we qualitatively demonstrate
the importance of modeling transformations in the foreground generation process. Another merit of
using transformation is that the intermediate outputs of the model are more interpretable and faciliate
to the downstreaming tasks, such as scene paring, which is demonstrated in Section 6.8.

5.6

IMPORTANCE OF SHAPES

We perform another ablation study by removing the mask generator to understand the importance
of modeling object shapes. In this case, the generated foreground is simply pasted on top of the
generated background after being transformed. There is no alpha blending between the foregrounds
and backgrounds. The generation results for three datasets, MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 are
shown in Fig. 12. As we can see, though the model works well for the generation of MNIST-ONE, it
fails to generate reasonable images across the other datasets. Particularly, the training does not even
converge for CUB-200. Based on these results, we qualitatively demonstrate that mask generator in
our model is fairly important to obtain plausible results, especially for realistic images.

REFERENCES

Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel.

Info-
gan: Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03657, 2016.

Trevor Darrell and Alex Pentland. Robust estimation of a multi-layered motion representation. IEEE

Workshop on Visual Motion, 1991.

12

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Emily L Denton, Soumith Chintala, Rob Fergus, et al. Deep generative image models using a
laplacian pyramid of adversarial networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
pp. 1486–1494, 2015.

S. M. Ali Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Geof-
frey E. Hinton. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with generative models. CoRR,
abs/1603.08575, 2016.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, pp. 2672–2680, 2014.

Karol Gregor, Ivo Danihelka, Alex Graves, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Draw: A

recurrent neural network for image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.046239, 2015.

Gary B. Huang, Manu Ramesh, Tamara Berg, and Erik Learned-Miller. Labeled faces in the wild:
A database for studying face recognition in unconstrained environments. Technical Report 07-49,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, October 2007.

Jonathan Huang and Kevin Murphy. Efﬁcient inference in occlusion-aware generative models of

images. CoRR, abs/1511.06362, 2015.

Daniel Jiwoong Im, Chris Dongjoo Kim, Hui Jiang, and Roland Memisevic. Generating images

with recurrent adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.05110, 2016.

Phillip Isola and Ce Liu. Scene collaging: Analysis and synthesis of natural images with semantic

layers. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3048–3055, 2013.

Max Jaderberg, Karen Simonyan, Andrew Zisserman, and koray kavukcuoglu. Spatial transformer
networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28, pp. 2017–2025, 2015.

Anitha Kannan, Nebojsa Jojic, and Brendan Frey. Generative model for layers of appearance and

deformation. AISTATS, 2005.

Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, and Max Welling. Improving variational inference with inverse

autoregressive ﬂow. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04934, 2016.

Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Hanock Kwak and Byoung-Tak Zhang. Generating images part by part with composite generative

adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05387, 2016.

Yann LeCun, L´eon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to

document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.

Elman Mansimov, Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Generating images

from captions with attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02793, 2015.

Javier Portilla and Eero P Simoncelli. A parametric texture model based on joint statistics of com-

plex wavelet coefﬁcients. International journal of computer vision, 40(1):49–70, 2000.

Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep

convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.

Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Santosh Mohan, Samuel Tenka, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee. Learn-

ing what and where to draw. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02454, 2016a.

Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee.

Generative adversarial text to image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.05396, 2016b.

Nicolas Le Roux, Nicolas Heess, Jamie Shotton, and John Winn. Learning a generative model of

images by factoring appearance and shape. Neural Computation, 23:593–650, 2011.

Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.

Improved techniques for training gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03498, 2016.

13

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

A¨aron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural networks.

CoRR, abs/1601.06759, 2016.

Carl Vondrick, Hamed Pirsiavash, and Antonio Torralba. Generating videos with scene dynamics.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02612, 2016.

John Wang and Edward Adelson. Representing moving images with layers. IEEE Transactions on

Image Processing, 1994.

Xiaolong Wang and Abhinav Gupta. Generative image modeling using style and structure adversar-

ial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.05631, 2016.

P. Welinder, S. Branson, T. Mita, C. Wah, F. Schroff, S. Belongie, and P. Perona. Caltech-UCSD

Birds 200. Technical Report CNS-TR-2010-001, California Institute of Technology, 2010.

Xinchen Yan, Jimei Yang, Kihyuk Sohn, and Honglak Lee. Attribute2image: Conditional image

generation from visual attributes. CoRR, abs/1512.00570, 2015.

Junbo Zhao, Michael Mathieu, and Yann LeCun. Energy-based generative adversarial network.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03126, 2016.

Jun-Yan Zhu, Philipp Kr¨ahenb¨uhl, Eli Shechtman, and Alexei A Efros. Generative visual manipu-
lation on the natural image manifold. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 597–613.
Springer, 2016.

6 APPENDIX

6.1 ALGORITHM

Algo. 1 illustrates the generative process in our model. g((cid:63)) evaluates the function g at (cid:63). ◦ is a
composition operator that composes its operands so that f ◦ g((cid:63)) = f (g((cid:63))).

(cid:46) background generator

(cid:46) pass through LSTM

Algorithm 1 Stochastic Layered Recursive Image Generation

l

])

, ct−1
l

l ← LSTM([zt, ht−1

zt ∼ N (0, I)
ht
l, ct
if t = 1 then
yt ← ht
l

1: z0 ∼ N (0, I)
2: x0 = Gb(z0)
3: h0
l ← 0
4: c0
l ← 0
5: for t ∈ [1 · · · T ] do
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16: mt ← Gm
ht
f ← Ec
17:
xt ← ST (mt, at) (cid:12) ST (ft, at) + (1 − ST (mt, at)) (cid:12) xt−1
18:
19: end for

end if
st ← Gc
f (yt)
at ← Tf (yt)
ft ← Gi
f (st)
f (st)
f ◦ P c

yt ← El

l ht−1

f ([ht

f (st)

else

])

f

(cid:46) pass through non-linear embedding layers El
f

(cid:46) predict shared cube for Gi

f and Gm
f
(cid:46) object transformation
(cid:46) generate object appearance
(cid:46) generate object shape
(cid:46) predict shared represenation embedding

6.2 MODEL CONFIGURATIONS

Table 2 lists the information and model conﬁguration for different datasets. The dimensions of
random vectors and hidden vectors are all set to 100. We also compare the number of parameters in
DCGAN and LR-GAN. The numbers before ‘/’ are our model, after ‘/’ are DCGAN. Based on the
same notation used in (Zhao et al., 2016), the architectures for the different datasets are:

14

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Table 2: Information and model conﬁgurations on different datasets.

Dataset

MNIST-ONE MNIST-TWO

CIFAR-10

CUB-200

Image Size
#Images
#Timesteps
#Parameters

32
60,000
2

64
60,000
3

32
50,000
2

64
5,994
2

5.25M/4.11M 7.53M/6.33M 5.26M/4.11M 27.3M/6.34M

• MNIST-ONE: Gb:

(256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc
f :

(512)4c-(256)4c2s-

(128)4c2s; Gi

f : (3)4c2s; Gm

f : (1)4c2s; D: (64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(256)4p4s-1

• MNIST-TWO: Gb:

(256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(32)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc
f :

(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s; Gi
f :
(256)4c2s-(512)4c2s-(512)4p4s-1

(3)4c2s; Gm
f :

(1)4c2s;D:

(512)4c-
(64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-

• CUB-200: Gb: (512)4c-(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc

(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s; Gi
f :
(1024)4c2s-(1024)4p4s-1

(3)4c2s; Gm
f :

(1)4c2s;D:

f : (1024)4c-(512)4c2s-
(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(512)4c2s-

• CIFAR-10: Gb: (256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc

f : (512)4c-(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s;

Gi

f : (3)4c2s; Gm

f : (1)4c2s D: (64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(256)4p4s-1

6.3 RESULTS ON MNIST-ONE

We conduct human studies on generation results on MNIST-ONE. Speciﬁcally, we generate 1,000
images using both LR-GAN and DCGAN. As references, we also include 1000 real images. Then
we ask the users on AMT to label each image to be one of the digits (0-9). We also provide them
an option ‘non recognizable’ in case the generated image does not seem to contain a digit. Each
image was judged by 5 unique workers. Similar to CIFAR-10, if an image is recognized to be the
same digit by all 5 users, it is assigned to quality level 5. If it is not recognizable according to all
users, it is assigned to quality level 0. Fig. 13 (left) shows the number of images assigned to all six
quality levels. Compared to DCGAN, our model generated more samples with high quality levels.
As expected, the real images have many samples with high quality levels. In Fig. 13 (right), we show
the number of images that are recognized to each digit category (0-9). For qualitative comparison,
we show examplar images at each quality level in Fig. 14. From left to right, the quality level
increases from 0 to 5. As expected, the images with higher quality level are more clear.

For quantitative evaluation, we use the same way as for CIFAR-10. The classiﬁer model used for
contextual Inception Score is trained based on the training set. We generate 60,000 samples based
on DCGAN and LR-GAN for evaluation, respectively. To obtain the Adversarial Accuracy and
Adversarial Divergence, we ﬁrst train 10 generators for 10 digit categories separately, and then use
the generated samples to train the classiﬁer. As shown in Table 3, our model has higher scores than
DCGAN on both standard and contextual Inception Score. Also, our model has a slightly higher

Figure 13: Statistics of annotations in human studies on MNIST-ONE. Left: distribution of quality
level; Right: distribution of recognized digit categories.

15

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 14: Qualitative comparison on MNIST-ONE. Top three rows are samples generated by DC-
GAN. Bottom three rows are samples generated by LR-GAN. The quality level increases from left
to right as determined via human studies.

Table 3: Quantitative comparison on MNIST-ONE.

Training Data

Real Images

DCGAN

Ours

Inception Score†
Inception Score††
Adversarial Accuracy
Adversarial Divergence Score
†Evaluate using the pre-trained Inception net as Salimans et al. (2016)
††Evaluate using the supervisedly trained classiﬁer based on the discriminator in LR-GAN.

2.03±0.01
6.42±0.03
26.12 ± 0.07
8.47 ± 0.03

1.83±0.01
9.15±0.04
95.22 ± 0.25
0

2.06±0.01
7.15±0.04
26.61 ± 0.06
8.39 ± 0.04

adversarial accuracy, and lower adversarial divergence than DCGAN. We ﬁnd that the all three
image sets have low standard Inception Scores. This is mainly because the Inception net is trained
on ImageNet, which has a very different data distribution from the MNIST dataset. Based on this,
we argue that the standard Inception Score is not suitable for some image datasets.

6.4 MORE RESULTS ON CUB-200

In this experiment, we reduce the minimal allowed object scale to 1.1, which allows the model to
generate larger foreground objects. The results are shown in Fig. 15. Similar to the results when the
constraint is 1.2, the crisp bird-like masks are generated automatically by our model.

Figure 15: Generation results of our model on CUB-200 when setting minimal allowed scale to
1.1. From left to right, the blocks show the generated background images, foreground images,
foreground masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved foreground images after spatial
transformation. The sixth and seventh blocks are ﬁnal composite images and the nearest neighbor
real images.

16

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

6.5 MORE RESULTS ON CIFAR-10

6.5.1 QUALITATIVE RESULTS

In Fig. 16, we show more results on CIFAR-10 when setting minimal allowed object scale to 1.1.
The rightmost column block also shows the training images that are closest to the generated images
(cosine similarity in pixel space). We can see our model does not memorize the training data.

Figure 16: Generation results of our model on CIFAR-10 with minimal allowed scale be 1.1, From
left to right, the layout is same to Fig. 15.

6.5.2 WALKING IN THE LATENT SPACE

Similar to DCGAN, we also show results by walking in the latent space. Note that our model has
two or more inputs. So we can walk along any of them or their combination. In Fig. 17, we generate
multiple foregrounds for the same ﬁxed generated background. We ﬁnd that our model consistently
generates contextually compatible foregrounds. For example, for the grass-like backgrounds, the
foreground generator generates horses and deer, and airplane-like objects for the blue sky.

6.5.3 WORD CLOUD BASED ON HUMAN STUDY

As we mentioned above, we conducted human studies on CIFAR-10. Besides asking people to select
a name from a list for an image, we also conducted another human study where we ask people to use
one word (free-form) to describe the main object in the image. Each image was ‘named’ by 5 unique
people. We generate word clouds for real images, images generated by DCGAN and LR-GAN, as
shown in Fig. 18.

6.6 RESULTS ON LFW FACE DATASET

We conduct experiment on face images in LFW dataset (Huang et al., 2007). Different from previous
works which work on cropped and aligned faces, we directly generate the original images which
contains a large portion of backgrounds. This conﬁguration helps to verify the efﬁciency of LR-GAN
to model the object appearance, shape and pose. In Fig. 19, we show the (intermediate) generation
results of LR-GAN. Surprisingly, without any supervisions, the model generated background and
faces in separate steps, and the generated masks accurately depict face shapes. Moreover, the model

17

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 17: Walking in the latent foreground space by ﬁxing backgrounds in our model on CIFAR-
10. From left to right, the blocks are: generated background images, foreground images, foreground
masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved out foreground images after spatial transfor-
mation, and ﬁnal composite images. Each row has the same background, but different foregrounds.

Figure 18: Statistics of annotations in human studies on CIFAR-10. Left to right: word cloud for
real images, images generated by DCGAN, images generated by LR-GAN.

Figure 19: Generation results of our model on LFW. From left to right, the blocks are: generated
background images, foreground images, foreground masks, carved out foreground images after spa-
tial transformation, and ﬁnal composite images.

learns where to place the generated faces so that the whole image looks natural. For comparison,

18

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

please refer to (Kwak & Zhang, 2016) which does not model the transformation. We can ﬁnd the
generation results degrade much.

6.7 STATISTICS ON TRANSFORMATION MATRICES

In this part, we analyze the statistics on the transformation matrices generated by our model for
different datasets, including MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 and LFW. We used afﬁne transfor-
mation in our model. So there are 6 parameters, scaling in the x coordinate (sx), scaling in the y
coordinate (sy), translation in the x coordinate (tx), translation in the y coordinate (ty), rotation in
the x coordinate (rx) and rotation in the y coordinate (ry). In Fig. 20, we show the histograms on dif-
ferent parameters for different datasets.These histograms show that the model produces non-trivial
varied scaling, translation and rotation on all datasets. For different datasets, the learned transfor-
mation have different patterns. We hypothesize that this is mainly determined by the conﬁgurations
of objects in the images. For example, on MNIST-ONE, all six parameters have some ﬂuctuations
since the synthetic dataset contains digits randomly placed at different locations. For the other three
datasets, the scalings converge to single value since the object sizes do not vary much, and the vari-
ations on rotation and translation sufﬁce to generate realistic images. Speciﬁcally, we can ﬁnd the
generator largely relies on the translation on x coordinate for generating CUB-200. This makes
sense since birds in the images have similar scales, orientations but various horizontal locations. For
CIFAR-10, since there are 10 different object categories, the conﬁgurations are more diverse, hence
the generator uses all parameters for generation except for the scaling. For LFW, since faces have
similar conﬁgurations, the learned transformations have less ﬂuctuation as well. As a result, we can
see that LR-GAN indeed models the transformations on the foreground to generate images.

6.8 CONDITIONAL IMAGE GENERATION

Considering our model can generate object-like masks (shapes) for images, we conducted an ex-
periment to evaluate whether our model can be potentially used for image segmentation and object
detection. We make some changes to the model. For the background generator, the input is a real
image instead of a random vector. Then the image is passed through an encoder to extract the hid-
den features, which replaces the random vector z0 and are fed to the background generator. For the
foreground generator, we subtract the image generated by the background generator from the input
image to obtain a residual image. Then this residual image is fed to the same encoder to get the
hidden features, which are used as the input for foreground generator. In our conditional model,
we want to reconstruct the image, so we add a reconstruction loss along with the adversarial loss.
We train this conditional model on CIFAR-10. The (intermediate) outputs of the model is shown
in Fig. 21. Interestingly, the model successfully learned to decompose the input images into back-
ground and foreground. The background generator tends to do an image inpainting by generating a
complete background without object, while the foreground generator works as a segmentation model
to get object mask from the input image.

Similarly, we also run the conditional LR-GAN on LFW dataset. As we can see in Fig. 22, the fore-
ground generator automatically and consistently learned to generate the face regions, even though
there are large portion of background in the input images. In other words, the conditional LR-GAN
successfully learned to detection faces in images. We suspect this success is due to that it has low
cost for the generator to generate similar images, and thus converge to the case that the ﬁrst generator
generate background, and the second generator generate face images.

Based on these experiments, we argue that our model can be possibly used for image segmentation
and object detection in a generative and unsupervised manner. One future work would be verifying
this by applying it to high-resolution and more complicate datasets.

19

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 20: Histograms of transformation parameters learnt in our model for different datasets. From
left to right, the datasets are: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 and LFW. From top to bottom,
they are scaling sx, sy, translation tx, ty, and rotation rx, ry in x and y coordinate, respectively.

20

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 21: Conditional generation results of our model on CIFAR-10. From left to right, the blocks
are: real images, generated background images, foreground images, foreground masks, foreground
images carved out by masks, carved foreground images after spatial transformation, and ﬁnal com-
posite (reconstructed) images.

Figure 22: Conditional generation results of our model on LFW, displayed with the same layout to
Fig. 21.

21

7
1
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
0
6
5
1
0
.
3
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

LR-GAN: LAYERED RECURSIVE GENERATIVE AD-
VERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR IMAGE GENERATION

Jianwei Yang∗
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
jw2yang@vt.edu

Anitha Kannan
Facebook AI Research
Menlo Park, CA
akannan@fb.com

Dhruv Batra∗and Devi Parikh∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA
{dbatra, parikh}@gatech.edu

ABSTRACT

We present LR-GAN: an adversarial image generation model which takes scene
structure and context into account. Unlike previous generative adversarial net-
works (GANs), the proposed GAN learns to generate image background and fore-
grounds separately and recursively, and stitch the foregrounds on the background
in a contextually relevant manner to produce a complete natural image. For each
foreground, the model learns to generate its appearance, shape and pose. The
whole model is unsupervised, and is trained in an end-to-end manner with gradient
descent methods. The experiments demonstrate that LR-GAN can generate more
natural images with objects that are more human recognizable than DCGAN. The
code is available at https://github.com/jwyang/lr-gan.pytorch.

1

INTRODUCTION

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) have shown signiﬁcant promise
as generative models for natural images. A ﬂurry of recent work has proposed improvements over
the original GAN work for image generation (Radford et al., 2015; Denton et al., 2015; Salimans
et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2016), multi-stage image generation
including part-based models (Im et al., 2016; Kwak & Zhang, 2016), image generation conditioned
on input text or attributes (Mansimov et al., 2015; Reed et al., 2016b;a), image generation based on
3D structure (Wang & Gupta, 2016), and even video generation (Vondrick et al., 2016).

While the holistic ‘gist’ of images generated by these approaches is beginning to look natural, there
is clearly a long way to go. For instance, the foreground objects in these images tend to be deformed,
blended into the background, and not look realistic or recognizable.

One fundamental limitation of these methods is that they attempt to generate images without taking
into account that images are 2D projections of a 3D visual world, which has a lot of structures in it.
This manifests as structure in the 2D images that capture this world. One example of this structure
is that images tend to have a background, and foreground objects are placed in this background in
contextually relevant ways.

We develop a GAN model that explicitly encodes this structure. Our proposed model generates im-
ages in a recursive fashion: it ﬁrst generates a background, and then conditioned on the background
generates a foreground along with a shape (mask) and a pose (afﬁne transformation) that together
deﬁne how the background and foreground should be composed to obtain a complete image. Condi-
tioned on this composite image, a second foreground and an associated shape and pose are generated,
and so on. As a byproduct in the course of recursive image generation, our approach generates some
object-shape foreground-background masks in a completely unsupervised way, without access to
any object masks for training. Note that decomposing a scene into foreground-background layers is
a classical ill-posed problem in computer vision. By explicitly factorizing appearance and transfor-
mation, LR-GAN encodes natural priors about the images that the same foreground can be ‘pasted’
to the different backgrounds, under different afﬁne transformations. According to the experiments,
the absence of these priors result in degenerate foreground-background decompositions, and thus
also degenerate ﬁnal composite images.

∗Work was done while visiting Facebook AI Research.

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 1: Generation results of our model on CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). It generates images
in two timesteps. At the ﬁrst timestep, it generates background images, while generates foreground
images, masks and transformations at the second timestep. Then, they are composed to obtain the
ﬁnal images. From top left to bottom right (row major), the blocks are real images, generated
background images, foreground images, foreground masks, carved foreground images, carved and
transformed foreground images, ﬁnal composite images, and their nearest neighbor real images in
the training set. Note that the model is trained in a completely unsupervised manner.

We mainly evaluate our approach on four datasets: MNIST-ONE (one digit) and MNIST-TWO (two
digits) synthesized from MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) and
CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). We show qualitatively (via samples) and quantitatively (via evalu-
ation metrics and human studies on Amazon Mechanical Turk) that LR-GAN generates images that
globally look natural and contain clear background and object structures in them that are realistic
and recognizable by humans as semantic entities. An experimental snapshot on CUB-200 is shown
in Fig. 1. We also ﬁnd that LR-GAN generates foreground objects that are contextually relevant to
the backgrounds (e.g., horses on grass, airplanes in skies, ships in water, cars on streets, etc.). For
quantitative comparison, besides existing metrics in the literature, we propose two new quantitative
metrics to evaluate the quality of generated images. The proposed metrics are derived from the sufﬁ-
cient conditions for the closeness between generated image distribution and real image distribution,
and thus supplement existing metrics.

2 RELATED WORK

Early work in parametric texture synthesis was based on a set of hand-crafted features (Portilla &
Simoncelli, 2000). Recent improvements in image generation using deep neural networks mainly
fall into one of the two stochastic models: variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma et al., 2016)
and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). VAEs pair a top-down prob-
abilistic generative network with a bottom up recognition network for amortized probabilistic infer-
ence. Two networks are jointly trained to maximize a variational lower bound on the data likelihood.
GANs consist of a generator and a discriminator in a minmax game with the generator aiming to
fool the discriminator with its samples with the latter aiming to not get fooled.

Sequential models have been pivotal for improved image generation using variational autoencoders:
DRAW (Gregor et al., 2015) uses attention based recurrence conditioning on the canvas drawn so
far. In Eslami et al. (2016), a recurrent generative model that draws one object at a time to the
canvas was used as the decoder in VAE. These methods are yet to show scalability to natural images.
Early compelling results using GANs used sequential coarse-to-ﬁne multiscale generation and class-
conditioning (Denton et al., 2015). Since then, improved training schemes (Salimans et al., 2016)
and better convolutional structure (Radford et al., 2015) have improved the generation results using

2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

GANs. PixelRNN (van den Oord et al., 2016) is also recently proposed to sequentially generates a
pixel at a time, along the two spatial dimensions.

In this paper, we combine the merits of sequential generation with the ﬂexibility of GANs. Our
model for sequential generation imbibes a recursive structure that more naturally mimics image
composition by inferring three components: appearance, shape, and pose. One closely related work
combining recursive structure with GAN is that of Im et al. (2016) but it does not explicitly model
object composition and follows a similar paradigm as by Gregor et al. (2015). Another closely re-
lated work is that of Kwak & Zhang (2016). It combines recursive structure and alpha blending.
However, our work differs in three main ways: (1) We explicitly use a generator for modeling the
foreground poses. That provides signiﬁcant advantage for natural images, as shown by our ablation
studies; (2) Our shape generator is separate from the appearance generator. This factored repre-
sentation allows more ﬂexibility in the generated scenes; (3) Our recursive framework generates
subsequent objects conditioned on the current and previous hidden vectors, and previously gener-
ated object. This allows for explicit contextual modeling among generated elements in the scene.
See Fig. 17 for contextually relevant foregrounds generated for the same background, or Fig. 6 for
meaningful placement of two MNIST digits relative to each.

Models that provide supervision to image generation using conditioning variables have also been
proposed: Style/Structure GANs (Wang & Gupta, 2016) learns separate generative models for style
and structure that are then composed to obtain ﬁnal images. In Reed et al. (2016a), GAN based
image generation is conditioned on text and the region in the image where the text manifests, spec-
iﬁed during training via keypoints or bounding boxes. While not the focus of our work, the model
proposed in this paper can be easily extended to take into account these forms of supervision.

3 PRELIMINARIES

3.1 GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) consist of a generator G and a discriminator D that are
simultaneously trained with competing goals: The generator G is trained to generate samples that
can ‘fool’ a discriminator D, while the discriminator is trained to classify its inputs as either real
(coming from the training dataset) or fake (coming from the samples of G). This competition leads
to a minmax formulation with a value function:

Ex∼pdata(x)[log(D(x; θD))] + Ez∼pz(z)[log(1 − D(G(z; θG); θD))]

(1)

(cid:17)

,

(cid:16)

min
θG

max
θD

where z is a random vector from a standard multivariate Gaussian or a uniform distribution pz(z),
G(z; θG) maps z to the data space, D(x) is the probability that x is real estimated by D. The
advantage of the GANs formulation is that it lacks an explicit loss function and instead uses the
discriminator to optimize the generative model. The discriminator, in turn, only cares whether the
sample it receives is on the data manifold, and not whether it exactly matches a particular training
example (as opposed to losses such as MSE). Hence, the discriminator provides a gradient signal
only when the generated samples do not lie on the data manifold so that the generator can readjust
its parameters accordingly. This form of training enables learning the data manifold of the training
set and not just optimizing to reconstruct the dataset, as in autoencoder and its variants.

While the GANs framework is largely agnostic to the choice of G and D, it is clear that generative
models with the ‘right’ inductive biases will be more effective in learning from the gradient infor-
mation (Denton et al., 2015; Im et al., 2016; Gregor et al., 2015; Reed et al., 2016a; Yan et al., 2015).
With this motivation, we propose a generator that models image generation via a recurrent process
– in each time step of the recurrence, an object with its own appearance and shape is generated and
warped according to a generated pose to compose an image in layers.

3.2 LAYERED STRUCTURE OF IMAGE

An image taken of our 3D world typically contains a layered structure. One way of representing an
image layer is by its appearance and shape. As an example, an image x with two layers, foreground
f and background b may be factorized as:

x = f (cid:12) m + b (cid:12) (1 − m),

(2)

3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

where m is the mask depicting the shapes of image layers, and (cid:12) the element wise multiplication
operator. Some existing methods assume the access to the shape of the object either during training
(Isola & Liu, 2013) or both at train and test time (Reed et al., 2016a; Yan et al., 2015). Representing
images in layered structure is even straightforward for video with moving objects (Darrell & Pent-
land, 1991; Wang & Adelson, 1994; Kannan et al., 2005). Vondrick et al. (2016) generates videos
by separately generating a ﬁxed background and moving foregrounds. A similar way of generating
single image can be found in Kwak & Zhang (2016).

Another way is modeling the layered structure with object appearance and pose as:

x = ST (f , a) + b,

(3)

where f and b are foreground and background, respectively; a is the afﬁne transformation; ST is
the spatial transformation operator. Several works fall into this group (Roux et al., 2011; Huang &
Murphy, 2015; Eslami et al., 2016). In Huang & Murphy (2015), images are decomposed into layers
of objects with speciﬁc poses in a variational autoencoder framework, while the number of objects
(i.e., layers) is adaptively estimated in Eslami et al. (2016).

To contrast with these works, LR-GAN uses a layered composition, and the foreground layers si-
multaneously model all three dominant factors of variation: appearance f , shape m and pose a. We
will elaborate it in the following section.

4 LAYERED RECURSIVE GAN (LR-GAN)

The basic structure of LR-GAN is similar to GAN: it consists of a discriminator and a generator that
are simultaneously trained using the minmax formulation of GAN, as described in §.3.1. The key
innovation of our work is the layered recursive generator, which is what we describe in this section.

The generator in LR-GAN is recursive in that the image is constructed recursively using a recurrent
network. Layered in that each recursive step composes an object layer that is ‘pasted’ on the image
generated so far. Object layer at timestep t is parameterized by the following three constituents –
‘canonical’ appearance ft, shape (or mask) mt, and pose (or afﬁne transformation) at for warping
the object before pasting in the image composition.

Fig. 2 shows the architecture of the LR-GAN with the generator architecture unrolled for generating
.
background x0 (
= xb) and foreground x1 and x2. At each time step t, the generator composes the
next image xt via the following recursive computation:

xt = ST (mt, at)
(cid:125)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
afﬁne transformed mask

(cid:124)

(cid:12)

ST (ft, at)
(cid:125)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
(cid:124)
afﬁne transformed appearance

,
+ (1 − ST (mt, at)) (cid:12) xt−1
(cid:125)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
pasting on image composed so far

(cid:124)

∀t ∈ [1, T ]

(4)

where ST ((cid:5), at) is a spatial transformation operator that outputs the afﬁne transformed version of
(cid:5) with at indicating parameters of the afﬁne transformation.

Since our proposed model has an explicit transformation variable at that is used to warp the object,
it can learn a canonical object representation that can be re-used to generate scenes where the ob-
ject occurs as mere transformations of it, such as different scales or rotations. By factorizing the
appearance, shape and pose, the object generator can focus on separately capturing regularities in
these three factors that constitute an object. We will demonstrate in our experiments that removing
these factorizations from the model leads to its spending capacity in variability that may not solely
be about the object in Section 5.5 and 5.6.

4.1 DETAILS OF GENERATOR ARCHITECTURE

Fig. 2 shows our LR-GAN architecture in detail – we use different shapes to indicate different kinds
of layers (convolutional, fractional convolutional, (non)linear, etc), as indicated by the legend. Our
model consists of two main pieces – a background generator Gb and a foreground generator Gf . Gb
and Gf do not share parameters with each other. Gb computation happens only once, while Gf is
recurrent over time, i.e., all object generators share the same parameters. In the following, we will
introduce each module and connections between them.

Temporal Connections. LR-GAN has two kinds of temporal connections – informally speaking,
one on ‘top’ and one on ‘bottom’. The ‘top’ connections perform the act of sequentially ‘pasting’

4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 2: LR-GAN architecture unfolded to three timesteps. It mainly consists of one background
generator, one foreground generator, temporal connections and one discriminator. The meaning of
each component is explained in the legend.

object layers (Eqn. 4). The ‘bottom’ connections are constructed by a LSTM on the noise vectors
z0, z1, z2. Intuitively, this noise-vector-LSTM provides information to the foreground generator
about what else has been generated in past. Besides, when generating multiple objects, we use a
pooling layer P c
f to extract the information from previous generated
object response map. By this way, the model is able to ‘see’ previously generated objects.

f and a fully-connected layer Ec

Background Generator. The background generator Gb is purposely kept simple. It takes the hidden
state of noise-vector-LSTM h0
l as the input and passes it to a number of fractional convolutional
layers (also called ‘deconvolution’ layer in some papers) to generate images at its end. The output
of background generator xb will be used as the canvas for the following generated foregrounds.

f . Gi

f and Gm

Foreground Generator. The foreground generator Gf is used to generate an object with appearance
and shape. Correspondingly, Gf consists of three sub-modules, Gc
f , which is a common ‘trunk’
whose outputs are shared by Gi
f is used to generate the foreground appearance ft,
while Gm
f generates the mask mt for the foreground. All three sub-modules consists of one or
more fractional convolutional layers combined with batch-normalization and nonlinear layers. The
generated foreground appearance and mask have the same spatial size as the background. The top
of Gm
f is a sigmoid layer in order to generate one channel mask whose values range in (0, 1).
Spatial Transformer. To spatially transform foreground objects, we need to estimate the trans-
formation matrix. As in Jaderberg et al. (2015), we predict the afﬁne transformation matrix with a
linear layer Tf that has six-dimensional outputs. Then based on the predicted transformation matrix,
we use a grid generator Gg to generate the corresponding sampling coordinates in the input for each
location at the output. The generated foreground appearance and mask share the same transforma-
tion matrix, and thus the same sampling grid. Given the grid, the sampler S will simultaneously
sample the ft and mt to obtain ˆft and ˆmt, respectively. Different from Jaderberg et al. (2015),
our sampler here normally performs downsampling, since the the foreground typically has smaller
size than the background. Pixels in ˆft and ˆmt that are from outside the extent of ft and mt are set
to zero. Finally, ˆft and ˆmt are sent to the compositor C which combines the canvas xt−1 and ˆft
through layered composition with blending weights given by ˆmt (Eqn. 4).

Pseudo-code for our approach and detailed model conﬁguration are provided in the Appendix.

5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

4.2 NEW EVALUATION METRICS

Several metrics have been proposed to evaluate GANs, such as Gaussian parzen window (Good-
fellow et al., 2014), Generative Adversarial Metric (GAM) (Im et al., 2016) and Inception Score
(Salimans et al., 2016). The common goal is to measure the similarity between the generated data
distribution Pg(x) = G(z; θz) and the real data distribution P (x). Most recently, Inception Score
has been used in several works (Salimans et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2016). However, it is an assymetric
metric and could be easily fooled by generating centers of data modes.

In addition to these metrics, we present two new metrics based on the following intuition – a suf-
ﬁcient (but not necessary) condition for closeness of Pg(x) and P (x) is closeness of Pg(x|y) and
P (x|y), i.e., distributions of generated data and real data conditioned on all possible variables of
interest y, e.g., category label. One way to obtain this variable of interest y is via human annotation.
Speciﬁcally, given the data sampled from Pg(x) and P (x), we ask people to label the category of the
samples according to some rules. Note that such human annotation is often easier than comparing
samples from the two distributions (e.g., because there is no 1:1 correspondence between samples
to conduct forced-choice tests).

After the annotations, we need to verify whether the two distributions are similar in each category.
Clearly, directly comparing the distributions Pg(x|y) and P (x|y) may be as difﬁcult as compar-
ing Pg(x) and P (x). Fortunately, we can use Bayes rule and alternatively compare Pg(y|x) and
P (y|x), which is a much easier task. In this case, we can simply train a discriminative model on
the samples from Pg(x) and P (x) together with the human annotations about categories of these
samples. With a slight abuse of notation, we use Pg(y|x) and P (y|x) to denote probability outputs
from these two classiﬁers (trained on generated samples vs trained on real samples). We can then
use these two classiﬁers to compute the following two evaluation metrics:

Adversarial Accuracy: Computes the classiﬁcation accuracies achieved by these two classiﬁers on
a validation set, which can be the training set or another set of real images sampled from P (x). If
Pg(x) is close to P (x), we expect to see similar accuracies.

Adversarial Divergence: Computes the KL divergence between Pg(y|x) and P (y|x). The lower
the adversarial divergence, the closer two distributions are. The low bound for this metric is exactly
zero, which means Pg(y|x) = P (y|x) for all samples in the validation set.

As discussed above, we need human efforts to label the real and generated samples. Fortunately, we
can further simplify this. Based on the labels given on training data, we split the training data into
categories, and train one generator for each category. With all these generators, we generate samples
of all categories. This strategy will be used in our experiments on the datasets with labels given.

5 EXPERIMENT

We conduct qualitative and quantitative evaluations on three datasets: 1) MNIST (LeCun et al.,
1998); 2) CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009); 3) CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). To add
variability to the MNIST images, we randomly scale (factor of 0.8 to 1.2) and rotate (− π
4 ) the
digits and then stitch them to 48 × 48 uniform backgrounds with random grayscale value between
[0, 200]. Images are then rescaled back to 32 × 32. Each image thus has a different background
grayscale value and a different transformed digit as foreground. We rename this sythensized dataset
as MNIST-ONE (single digit on a gray background). We also synthesize a dataset MNIST-TWO
containing two digits on a grayscale background. We randomly select two images of digits and
perform similar transformations as described above, and put one on the left and the other on the
right side of a 78 × 78 gray background. We resize the whole image to 64 × 64.

4 to π

We develop LR-GAN based on open source code1. We assume the number of objects is known.
Therefore, for MNIST-ONE, MNIST-TWO, CIFAR-10, and CUB-200, our model has two, three,
two, and two timesteps, respectively. Since the size of foreground object should be smaller than
that of canvas, we set the minimal allowed scale 2 in afﬁne transforamtion to be 1.2 for all datasets
except for MNIST-TWO, which is set to 2 (objects are smaller in MNIST-TWO). In LR-GAN, the

1https://github.com/soumith/dcgan.torch
2Scale corresponds to the size of the target canvas with respect to the object – the larger the scale, the larger

the canvas, and the smaller the relative size of the object in the canvas. 1 means the same size as the canvas.

6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 3: Generated images on CIFAR-10 based on our model.

Figure 4: Generated images on CUB-200 based on our model.

background generator and foreground generator have similar architectures. One difference is that
the number of channels in the background generator is half of the one in the foreground generator.
We compare our results to that of DCGAN (Radford et al., 2015). Note that LR-GAN without
LSTM at the ﬁrst timestep corresponds exactly to the DCGAN. This allows us to run controlled
experiments. In both generator and discriminator, all the (fractional) convolutional layers have 4 ×
4 ﬁlter size with stride 2. As a result, the number of layers in the generator and discriminator
automatically adapt to the size of training images. Please see the Appendix (Section 6.2) for details
about the conﬁgurations. We use three metrics for quantitative evaluation, including Inception Score
(Salimans et al., 2016) and the proposed Adversarial Accuracy, Adversarial Divergence. Note that
we report two versions of Inception Score. One is based on the pre-trained Inception net, and the
other one is based on the pre-trained classiﬁer on the target datasets.

5.1 QUALITATIVE RESULTS

In Fig. 3 and 4, we show the generated samples for CIFAR-10 and CUB-200, respectively. MNIST
results are shown in the next subsection. As we can see from the images, the compositional nature
of our model results in the images being free of blending artifacts between backgrounds and fore-
grounds. For CIFAR-10, we can see the horses and cars with clear shapes. For CUB-200, the bird
shapes tend to be even sharper.

5.2 MNIST-ONE AND MNIST-TWO

We now report the results on MNIST-ONE and MNIST-TWO. Fig. 5 shows the generation results of
our model on MNIST-ONE. As we can see, our model generates the background and the foreground
in separate timestep, and can disentagle the foreground digits from background nearly perfectly.
Though initial values of the mask randomly distribute in the range of (0, 1), after training, the masks
are nearly binary and accurately carve out the digits from the generated foreground. More results on
MNIST-ONE (including human studies) can be found in the Appendix (Section 6.3).

Fig. 6 shows the generation results for MNIST-TWO. Similarly, the model is also able to generate
background and the two foreground objects separately. The foreground generator tends to generate
a single digit at each timestep. Meanwhile, it captures the context information from the previous
time steps. When the ﬁrst digit is placed to the left side, the second one tends to be placed on the
right side, and vice versa.

7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 5: Generation results of our model on MNIST-ONE. From left to right, the image blocks are
real images, generated background images, generated foreground images, generated masks and ﬁnal
composite images, respectively.

Figure 6: Generation results of our model on MNIST-TWO. From top left to bottom right (row
major), the image blocks are real images, generated background images, foreground images and
masks at the second timestep, composite images at the second time step, generated foreground
images and masks at the third timestep and the ﬁnal composite images, respectively.

5.3 CUB-200

We study the effectiveness of our model trained on the CUB-200 bird dataset. In Fig. 1, we have
shown a random set of generated images, along with the intermediate generation results of the model.
While being completely unsupervised, the model, for a large fraction of the samples, is able to

Figure 7: Matched pairs of generated images based on DCGAN and LR-GAN, respectivedly. The
odd columns are generated by DCGAN, and the even columns are generated by LR-GAN. These
are paired according to the perfect matching based on Hungarian algorithm.

8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 8: Qualitative comparison on CIFAR-10. Top three rows are images generated by DCGAN;
Bottom three rows are by LR-GAN. From left to right, the blocks display generated images with
increasing quality level as determined by human studies.

successfully disentangle the foreground and the background. This is evident from the generated
bird-like masks.

We do a comparative study based on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) between DCGAN and LR-
GAN to quantify relative visual quality of the generated images. We ﬁrst generated 1000 samples
from both the models. Then, we performed perfect matching between the two image sets using
the Hungarian algorithm on L2 norm distance in the pixel space. This resulted in 1000 image
pairs. Some examplar pairs are shown in Fig. 7. For each image pair, 9 judges are asked to choose
the one that is more realistic. Based on majority voting, we ﬁnd that our generated images are
selected 68.4% times, compared with 31.6% times for DCGAN. This demonstrates that our model
has generated more realistic images than DCGAN. We can attribute this difference to our model’s
ability to generate foreground separately from the background, enabling stronger edge cues.

5.4 CIFAR-10

We now qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate our model on CIFAR-10, which contains multiple
object categories and also various backgrounds.

Comparison of image generation quality: We conduct AMT studies to compare the ﬁdelity of
image generation. Towards this goal, we generate 1000 images from DCGAN and LR-GAN, re-
spectively. We ask 5 judges to label each image to either belong to one of the 10 categories or as
‘non recognizable’ or ‘recognizable but not belonging to the listed categories’. We then assign each
image a quality level between [0,5] that captures the number of judges that agree with the majority
choice. Fig. 8 shows the images generated by both approaches, ordered by increasing quality level.
We merge images at quality level 0 (all judges said non-recognizable) and 1 together, and similarly
images at level 4 and 5. Visually, the generated samples by our model have clearer boundaries and
object structures. We also computed the fraction of non-recognizable images: Our model had a 10%
absolute drop in non-recognizability rate (67.3% for ours vs. 77.7% for DCGAN). For reference,
11.4% of real CIFAR images were categorized as non-recognizable. Fig. 9 shows more generated
(intermediate) results of our model.

Quantitative evaluation on generators: We evaluate the generators based on three metrics: 1)
Inception Score; 2) Adversarial Accuracy; 3) Adversarial Divergence. To obtain a classiﬁer model
for evaluation, we remove the top layer in the discriminator used in our model, and then append
two fully connected layers on the top of it. We train this classiﬁer using the training samples of
CIFAR-10 based on the annotations. Following Salimans et al. (2016), we generated 50,000 images

Table 1: Quantitative comparison between DCGAN and LR-GAN on CIFAR-10.

Training Data

Real Images

DCGAN

Ours

Inception Score†
Inception Score††
Adversarial Accuracy
Adversarial Divergence
†Evaluate using the pre-trained Inception net as Salimans et al. (2016)
††Evaluate using the supervisedly trained classiﬁer based on the discriminator in LR-GAN.

7.17±0.07
6.11±0.06
44.22 ±0.08
5.57±0.06

6.64±0.14
5.69±0.07
37.81±0.02
7.58±0.04

11.18±0.18
7.23±0.09
83.33±0.08
0

9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 9: Generation results of our model on CIFAR-10. From left to right, the blocks are: gener-
ated background images, foreground images, foreground masks, foreground images carved out by
masks, carved foregrounds after spatial transformation, ﬁnal composite images and nearest neighbor
training images to the generated images.

Figure 10: Category speciﬁc generation results of our model on CIFAR-10 categories of horse, frog,
and cat (top to bottom). The blocks from left to right are: generated background images, foreground
images, foreground masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved foregrounds after spatial
transformation and ﬁnal composite images.

based on DCGAN and LR-GAN, repsectively. We compute two types of Inception Scores. The
standard Inception Score is based on the Inception net as in Salimans et al. (2016), and the contex-
tual Inception Score is based on our trained classiﬁer model. To distinguish, we denote the standard
one as ‘Inception Score†’, and the contextual one as ‘Inception Score††’. To obtain the Adversarial
Accuracy and Adversarial Divergence scores, we train one generator on each of 10 categories for
DCGAN and LR-GAN, respectively. Then, we use these generators to generate samples of different
categories. Given these generated samples, we train the classiﬁers for DCGAN and LR-GAN sepa-
rately. Along with the classiﬁer trained on the real samples, we compute the Adversarial Accuracy

10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

and Adversarial Divergence on the real training samples. In Table 1, we report the Inception Scores,
Adversarial Accuracy and Adversarial Divergence for comparison. We can see that our model out-
performs DCGAN across the board. To point out, we obtan different Inception Scores based on
different classiﬁer models, which indicates that the Inception Score varies with different models.

Quantitative evaluation on discriminators: We evaluate the discriminator as an extractor for deep
representations. Speciﬁcally, we use the output of the last convolutional layer in the discriminator
as features. We perform a 1-NN classiﬁcation on the test set given the full training set. Cosine
similarity is used as the metric. On the test set, our model achieves 62.09%±0.01% compared to
DCGAN’s 56.05%±0.02%.

Contextual generation: We also show the efﬁcacy of our approach to generate diverse foregrounds
conditioned on ﬁxed background. The results in Fig. 17 in Appendix showcase that the foreground
generator generates objects that are compatible with the background. This indicates that the model
has captured contextual dependencies between the image layers.

Category speciﬁc models: The objects in CIFAR-10 exhibit huge variability in shapes. That can
partly explain why some of the generated shapes are not as compelling in Fig. 9. To test this hy-
pothesis, we reuse the generators trained for each of 10 categories used in our metrics to obtain the
generation results. Fig. 10 shows results for categories ‘horse’, ‘frog’ and ‘cat’. We can see that the
model is now able to generate object-speciﬁc appearances and shapes, similar in vein to our results
on the CUB-200 dataset.

5.5

IMPORTANCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS

Figure 11: Generation results from an ablated LR-GAN model without afﬁne transformations. From
top to bottom, the block rows correspond to different datasets: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10.
From left to right, the blocks show generated background images, foreground images, foreground
masks, and ﬁnal composite images. For comparison, the rightmost column block shows ﬁnal gener-
ated images from a non-ablated model with afﬁne transformations.

Fig. 11 shows results from an ablated model without afﬁne transformations in the foreground layers,
and compares the results with the full model that does include these transformations. We note that
one signiﬁcant problem emerges that the decompositions are degenerate, in the sense that the model
is unable to break the symmetry between foreground and background layers, often generating object
appearances in the model’s background layer and vice versa. For CUB-200, the ﬁnal generated im-
ages have some blendings between foregrounds and backgrounds. This is particularly the case for

11

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 12: Generation results from an ablated LR-GAN model without mask generator. The block
rows correspond to different datasets (from top to bottom: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10).
From left to right, the blocks show generated background images, foreground images, transformed
foreground images, and ﬁnal composite images. For comparison, the rightmost column block shows
ﬁnal generated images from a non-ablated model with mask generator.

those images without bird-shape masks. For CIFAR-10, a number of generated masks are inverted.
In this case, the background images are carved out as the foreground objects. The foreground gener-
ator takes almost all the duty to generate the ﬁnal images, which make it harder to generate images
as clear as the model with transformation. From these comparisons, we qualitatively demonstrate
the importance of modeling transformations in the foreground generation process. Another merit of
using transformation is that the intermediate outputs of the model are more interpretable and faciliate
to the downstreaming tasks, such as scene paring, which is demonstrated in Section 6.8.

5.6

IMPORTANCE OF SHAPES

We perform another ablation study by removing the mask generator to understand the importance
of modeling object shapes. In this case, the generated foreground is simply pasted on top of the
generated background after being transformed. There is no alpha blending between the foregrounds
and backgrounds. The generation results for three datasets, MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 are
shown in Fig. 12. As we can see, though the model works well for the generation of MNIST-ONE, it
fails to generate reasonable images across the other datasets. Particularly, the training does not even
converge for CUB-200. Based on these results, we qualitatively demonstrate that mask generator in
our model is fairly important to obtain plausible results, especially for realistic images.

REFERENCES

Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel.

Info-
gan: Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03657, 2016.

Trevor Darrell and Alex Pentland. Robust estimation of a multi-layered motion representation. IEEE

Workshop on Visual Motion, 1991.

12

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Emily L Denton, Soumith Chintala, Rob Fergus, et al. Deep generative image models using a
laplacian pyramid of adversarial networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
pp. 1486–1494, 2015.

S. M. Ali Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Geof-
frey E. Hinton. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with generative models. CoRR,
abs/1603.08575, 2016.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, pp. 2672–2680, 2014.

Karol Gregor, Ivo Danihelka, Alex Graves, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Draw: A

recurrent neural network for image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.046239, 2015.

Gary B. Huang, Manu Ramesh, Tamara Berg, and Erik Learned-Miller. Labeled faces in the wild:
A database for studying face recognition in unconstrained environments. Technical Report 07-49,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, October 2007.

Jonathan Huang and Kevin Murphy. Efﬁcient inference in occlusion-aware generative models of

images. CoRR, abs/1511.06362, 2015.

Daniel Jiwoong Im, Chris Dongjoo Kim, Hui Jiang, and Roland Memisevic. Generating images

with recurrent adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.05110, 2016.

Phillip Isola and Ce Liu. Scene collaging: Analysis and synthesis of natural images with semantic

layers. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3048–3055, 2013.

Max Jaderberg, Karen Simonyan, Andrew Zisserman, and koray kavukcuoglu. Spatial transformer
networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28, pp. 2017–2025, 2015.

Anitha Kannan, Nebojsa Jojic, and Brendan Frey. Generative model for layers of appearance and

deformation. AISTATS, 2005.

Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, and Max Welling. Improving variational inference with inverse

autoregressive ﬂow. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04934, 2016.

Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Hanock Kwak and Byoung-Tak Zhang. Generating images part by part with composite generative

adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05387, 2016.

Yann LeCun, L´eon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to

document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.

Elman Mansimov, Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Generating images

from captions with attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02793, 2015.

Javier Portilla and Eero P Simoncelli. A parametric texture model based on joint statistics of com-

plex wavelet coefﬁcients. International journal of computer vision, 40(1):49–70, 2000.

Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep

convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.

Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Santosh Mohan, Samuel Tenka, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee. Learn-

ing what and where to draw. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02454, 2016a.

Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee.

Generative adversarial text to image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.05396, 2016b.

Nicolas Le Roux, Nicolas Heess, Jamie Shotton, and John Winn. Learning a generative model of

images by factoring appearance and shape. Neural Computation, 23:593–650, 2011.

Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.

Improved techniques for training gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03498, 2016.

13

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

A¨aron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural networks.

CoRR, abs/1601.06759, 2016.

Carl Vondrick, Hamed Pirsiavash, and Antonio Torralba. Generating videos with scene dynamics.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02612, 2016.

John Wang and Edward Adelson. Representing moving images with layers. IEEE Transactions on

Image Processing, 1994.

Xiaolong Wang and Abhinav Gupta. Generative image modeling using style and structure adversar-

ial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.05631, 2016.

P. Welinder, S. Branson, T. Mita, C. Wah, F. Schroff, S. Belongie, and P. Perona. Caltech-UCSD

Birds 200. Technical Report CNS-TR-2010-001, California Institute of Technology, 2010.

Xinchen Yan, Jimei Yang, Kihyuk Sohn, and Honglak Lee. Attribute2image: Conditional image

generation from visual attributes. CoRR, abs/1512.00570, 2015.

Junbo Zhao, Michael Mathieu, and Yann LeCun. Energy-based generative adversarial network.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03126, 2016.

Jun-Yan Zhu, Philipp Kr¨ahenb¨uhl, Eli Shechtman, and Alexei A Efros. Generative visual manipu-
lation on the natural image manifold. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 597–613.
Springer, 2016.

6 APPENDIX

6.1 ALGORITHM

Algo. 1 illustrates the generative process in our model. g((cid:63)) evaluates the function g at (cid:63). ◦ is a
composition operator that composes its operands so that f ◦ g((cid:63)) = f (g((cid:63))).

(cid:46) background generator

(cid:46) pass through LSTM

Algorithm 1 Stochastic Layered Recursive Image Generation

l

])

, ct−1
l

l ← LSTM([zt, ht−1

zt ∼ N (0, I)
ht
l, ct
if t = 1 then
yt ← ht
l

1: z0 ∼ N (0, I)
2: x0 = Gb(z0)
3: h0
l ← 0
4: c0
l ← 0
5: for t ∈ [1 · · · T ] do
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16: mt ← Gm
ht
f ← Ec
17:
xt ← ST (mt, at) (cid:12) ST (ft, at) + (1 − ST (mt, at)) (cid:12) xt−1
18:
19: end for

end if
st ← Gc
f (yt)
at ← Tf (yt)
ft ← Gi
f (st)
f (st)
f ◦ P c

yt ← El

l ht−1

f ([ht

f (st)

else

])

f

(cid:46) pass through non-linear embedding layers El
f

(cid:46) predict shared cube for Gi

f and Gm
f
(cid:46) object transformation
(cid:46) generate object appearance
(cid:46) generate object shape
(cid:46) predict shared represenation embedding

6.2 MODEL CONFIGURATIONS

Table 2 lists the information and model conﬁguration for different datasets. The dimensions of
random vectors and hidden vectors are all set to 100. We also compare the number of parameters in
DCGAN and LR-GAN. The numbers before ‘/’ are our model, after ‘/’ are DCGAN. Based on the
same notation used in (Zhao et al., 2016), the architectures for the different datasets are:

14

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Table 2: Information and model conﬁgurations on different datasets.

Dataset

MNIST-ONE MNIST-TWO

CIFAR-10

CUB-200

Image Size
#Images
#Timesteps
#Parameters

32
60,000
2

64
60,000
3

32
50,000
2

64
5,994
2

5.25M/4.11M 7.53M/6.33M 5.26M/4.11M 27.3M/6.34M

• MNIST-ONE: Gb:

(256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc
f :

(512)4c-(256)4c2s-

(128)4c2s; Gi

f : (3)4c2s; Gm

f : (1)4c2s; D: (64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(256)4p4s-1

• MNIST-TWO: Gb:

(256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(32)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc
f :

(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s; Gi
f :
(256)4c2s-(512)4c2s-(512)4p4s-1

(3)4c2s; Gm
f :

(1)4c2s;D:

(512)4c-
(64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-

• CUB-200: Gb: (512)4c-(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc

(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s; Gi
f :
(1024)4c2s-(1024)4p4s-1

(3)4c2s; Gm
f :

(1)4c2s;D:

f : (1024)4c-(512)4c2s-
(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(512)4c2s-

• CIFAR-10: Gb: (256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc

f : (512)4c-(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s;

Gi

f : (3)4c2s; Gm

f : (1)4c2s D: (64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(256)4p4s-1

6.3 RESULTS ON MNIST-ONE

We conduct human studies on generation results on MNIST-ONE. Speciﬁcally, we generate 1,000
images using both LR-GAN and DCGAN. As references, we also include 1000 real images. Then
we ask the users on AMT to label each image to be one of the digits (0-9). We also provide them
an option ‘non recognizable’ in case the generated image does not seem to contain a digit. Each
image was judged by 5 unique workers. Similar to CIFAR-10, if an image is recognized to be the
same digit by all 5 users, it is assigned to quality level 5. If it is not recognizable according to all
users, it is assigned to quality level 0. Fig. 13 (left) shows the number of images assigned to all six
quality levels. Compared to DCGAN, our model generated more samples with high quality levels.
As expected, the real images have many samples with high quality levels. In Fig. 13 (right), we show
the number of images that are recognized to each digit category (0-9). For qualitative comparison,
we show examplar images at each quality level in Fig. 14. From left to right, the quality level
increases from 0 to 5. As expected, the images with higher quality level are more clear.

For quantitative evaluation, we use the same way as for CIFAR-10. The classiﬁer model used for
contextual Inception Score is trained based on the training set. We generate 60,000 samples based
on DCGAN and LR-GAN for evaluation, respectively. To obtain the Adversarial Accuracy and
Adversarial Divergence, we ﬁrst train 10 generators for 10 digit categories separately, and then use
the generated samples to train the classiﬁer. As shown in Table 3, our model has higher scores than
DCGAN on both standard and contextual Inception Score. Also, our model has a slightly higher

Figure 13: Statistics of annotations in human studies on MNIST-ONE. Left: distribution of quality
level; Right: distribution of recognized digit categories.

15

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 14: Qualitative comparison on MNIST-ONE. Top three rows are samples generated by DC-
GAN. Bottom three rows are samples generated by LR-GAN. The quality level increases from left
to right as determined via human studies.

Table 3: Quantitative comparison on MNIST-ONE.

Training Data

Real Images

DCGAN

Ours

Inception Score†
Inception Score††
Adversarial Accuracy
Adversarial Divergence Score
†Evaluate using the pre-trained Inception net as Salimans et al. (2016)
††Evaluate using the supervisedly trained classiﬁer based on the discriminator in LR-GAN.

2.03±0.01
6.42±0.03
26.12 ± 0.07
8.47 ± 0.03

1.83±0.01
9.15±0.04
95.22 ± 0.25
0

2.06±0.01
7.15±0.04
26.61 ± 0.06
8.39 ± 0.04

adversarial accuracy, and lower adversarial divergence than DCGAN. We ﬁnd that the all three
image sets have low standard Inception Scores. This is mainly because the Inception net is trained
on ImageNet, which has a very different data distribution from the MNIST dataset. Based on this,
we argue that the standard Inception Score is not suitable for some image datasets.

6.4 MORE RESULTS ON CUB-200

In this experiment, we reduce the minimal allowed object scale to 1.1, which allows the model to
generate larger foreground objects. The results are shown in Fig. 15. Similar to the results when the
constraint is 1.2, the crisp bird-like masks are generated automatically by our model.

Figure 15: Generation results of our model on CUB-200 when setting minimal allowed scale to
1.1. From left to right, the blocks show the generated background images, foreground images,
foreground masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved foreground images after spatial
transformation. The sixth and seventh blocks are ﬁnal composite images and the nearest neighbor
real images.

16

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

6.5 MORE RESULTS ON CIFAR-10

6.5.1 QUALITATIVE RESULTS

In Fig. 16, we show more results on CIFAR-10 when setting minimal allowed object scale to 1.1.
The rightmost column block also shows the training images that are closest to the generated images
(cosine similarity in pixel space). We can see our model does not memorize the training data.

Figure 16: Generation results of our model on CIFAR-10 with minimal allowed scale be 1.1, From
left to right, the layout is same to Fig. 15.

6.5.2 WALKING IN THE LATENT SPACE

Similar to DCGAN, we also show results by walking in the latent space. Note that our model has
two or more inputs. So we can walk along any of them or their combination. In Fig. 17, we generate
multiple foregrounds for the same ﬁxed generated background. We ﬁnd that our model consistently
generates contextually compatible foregrounds. For example, for the grass-like backgrounds, the
foreground generator generates horses and deer, and airplane-like objects for the blue sky.

6.5.3 WORD CLOUD BASED ON HUMAN STUDY

As we mentioned above, we conducted human studies on CIFAR-10. Besides asking people to select
a name from a list for an image, we also conducted another human study where we ask people to use
one word (free-form) to describe the main object in the image. Each image was ‘named’ by 5 unique
people. We generate word clouds for real images, images generated by DCGAN and LR-GAN, as
shown in Fig. 18.

6.6 RESULTS ON LFW FACE DATASET

We conduct experiment on face images in LFW dataset (Huang et al., 2007). Different from previous
works which work on cropped and aligned faces, we directly generate the original images which
contains a large portion of backgrounds. This conﬁguration helps to verify the efﬁciency of LR-GAN
to model the object appearance, shape and pose. In Fig. 19, we show the (intermediate) generation
results of LR-GAN. Surprisingly, without any supervisions, the model generated background and
faces in separate steps, and the generated masks accurately depict face shapes. Moreover, the model

17

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 17: Walking in the latent foreground space by ﬁxing backgrounds in our model on CIFAR-
10. From left to right, the blocks are: generated background images, foreground images, foreground
masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved out foreground images after spatial transfor-
mation, and ﬁnal composite images. Each row has the same background, but different foregrounds.

Figure 18: Statistics of annotations in human studies on CIFAR-10. Left to right: word cloud for
real images, images generated by DCGAN, images generated by LR-GAN.

Figure 19: Generation results of our model on LFW. From left to right, the blocks are: generated
background images, foreground images, foreground masks, carved out foreground images after spa-
tial transformation, and ﬁnal composite images.

learns where to place the generated faces so that the whole image looks natural. For comparison,

18

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

please refer to (Kwak & Zhang, 2016) which does not model the transformation. We can ﬁnd the
generation results degrade much.

6.7 STATISTICS ON TRANSFORMATION MATRICES

In this part, we analyze the statistics on the transformation matrices generated by our model for
different datasets, including MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 and LFW. We used afﬁne transfor-
mation in our model. So there are 6 parameters, scaling in the x coordinate (sx), scaling in the y
coordinate (sy), translation in the x coordinate (tx), translation in the y coordinate (ty), rotation in
the x coordinate (rx) and rotation in the y coordinate (ry). In Fig. 20, we show the histograms on dif-
ferent parameters for different datasets.These histograms show that the model produces non-trivial
varied scaling, translation and rotation on all datasets. For different datasets, the learned transfor-
mation have different patterns. We hypothesize that this is mainly determined by the conﬁgurations
of objects in the images. For example, on MNIST-ONE, all six parameters have some ﬂuctuations
since the synthetic dataset contains digits randomly placed at different locations. For the other three
datasets, the scalings converge to single value since the object sizes do not vary much, and the vari-
ations on rotation and translation sufﬁce to generate realistic images. Speciﬁcally, we can ﬁnd the
generator largely relies on the translation on x coordinate for generating CUB-200. This makes
sense since birds in the images have similar scales, orientations but various horizontal locations. For
CIFAR-10, since there are 10 different object categories, the conﬁgurations are more diverse, hence
the generator uses all parameters for generation except for the scaling. For LFW, since faces have
similar conﬁgurations, the learned transformations have less ﬂuctuation as well. As a result, we can
see that LR-GAN indeed models the transformations on the foreground to generate images.

6.8 CONDITIONAL IMAGE GENERATION

Considering our model can generate object-like masks (shapes) for images, we conducted an ex-
periment to evaluate whether our model can be potentially used for image segmentation and object
detection. We make some changes to the model. For the background generator, the input is a real
image instead of a random vector. Then the image is passed through an encoder to extract the hid-
den features, which replaces the random vector z0 and are fed to the background generator. For the
foreground generator, we subtract the image generated by the background generator from the input
image to obtain a residual image. Then this residual image is fed to the same encoder to get the
hidden features, which are used as the input for foreground generator. In our conditional model,
we want to reconstruct the image, so we add a reconstruction loss along with the adversarial loss.
We train this conditional model on CIFAR-10. The (intermediate) outputs of the model is shown
in Fig. 21. Interestingly, the model successfully learned to decompose the input images into back-
ground and foreground. The background generator tends to do an image inpainting by generating a
complete background without object, while the foreground generator works as a segmentation model
to get object mask from the input image.

Similarly, we also run the conditional LR-GAN on LFW dataset. As we can see in Fig. 22, the fore-
ground generator automatically and consistently learned to generate the face regions, even though
there are large portion of background in the input images. In other words, the conditional LR-GAN
successfully learned to detection faces in images. We suspect this success is due to that it has low
cost for the generator to generate similar images, and thus converge to the case that the ﬁrst generator
generate background, and the second generator generate face images.

Based on these experiments, we argue that our model can be possibly used for image segmentation
and object detection in a generative and unsupervised manner. One future work would be verifying
this by applying it to high-resolution and more complicate datasets.

19

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 20: Histograms of transformation parameters learnt in our model for different datasets. From
left to right, the datasets are: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 and LFW. From top to bottom,
they are scaling sx, sy, translation tx, ty, and rotation rx, ry in x and y coordinate, respectively.

20

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 21: Conditional generation results of our model on CIFAR-10. From left to right, the blocks
are: real images, generated background images, foreground images, foreground masks, foreground
images carved out by masks, carved foreground images after spatial transformation, and ﬁnal com-
posite (reconstructed) images.

Figure 22: Conditional generation results of our model on LFW, displayed with the same layout to
Fig. 21.

21

7
1
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
0
6
5
1
0
.
3
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

LR-GAN: LAYERED RECURSIVE GENERATIVE AD-
VERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR IMAGE GENERATION

Jianwei Yang∗
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
jw2yang@vt.edu

Anitha Kannan
Facebook AI Research
Menlo Park, CA
akannan@fb.com

Dhruv Batra∗and Devi Parikh∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA
{dbatra, parikh}@gatech.edu

ABSTRACT

We present LR-GAN: an adversarial image generation model which takes scene
structure and context into account. Unlike previous generative adversarial net-
works (GANs), the proposed GAN learns to generate image background and fore-
grounds separately and recursively, and stitch the foregrounds on the background
in a contextually relevant manner to produce a complete natural image. For each
foreground, the model learns to generate its appearance, shape and pose. The
whole model is unsupervised, and is trained in an end-to-end manner with gradient
descent methods. The experiments demonstrate that LR-GAN can generate more
natural images with objects that are more human recognizable than DCGAN. The
code is available at https://github.com/jwyang/lr-gan.pytorch.

1

INTRODUCTION

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) have shown signiﬁcant promise
as generative models for natural images. A ﬂurry of recent work has proposed improvements over
the original GAN work for image generation (Radford et al., 2015; Denton et al., 2015; Salimans
et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2016), multi-stage image generation
including part-based models (Im et al., 2016; Kwak & Zhang, 2016), image generation conditioned
on input text or attributes (Mansimov et al., 2015; Reed et al., 2016b;a), image generation based on
3D structure (Wang & Gupta, 2016), and even video generation (Vondrick et al., 2016).

While the holistic ‘gist’ of images generated by these approaches is beginning to look natural, there
is clearly a long way to go. For instance, the foreground objects in these images tend to be deformed,
blended into the background, and not look realistic or recognizable.

One fundamental limitation of these methods is that they attempt to generate images without taking
into account that images are 2D projections of a 3D visual world, which has a lot of structures in it.
This manifests as structure in the 2D images that capture this world. One example of this structure
is that images tend to have a background, and foreground objects are placed in this background in
contextually relevant ways.

We develop a GAN model that explicitly encodes this structure. Our proposed model generates im-
ages in a recursive fashion: it ﬁrst generates a background, and then conditioned on the background
generates a foreground along with a shape (mask) and a pose (afﬁne transformation) that together
deﬁne how the background and foreground should be composed to obtain a complete image. Condi-
tioned on this composite image, a second foreground and an associated shape and pose are generated,
and so on. As a byproduct in the course of recursive image generation, our approach generates some
object-shape foreground-background masks in a completely unsupervised way, without access to
any object masks for training. Note that decomposing a scene into foreground-background layers is
a classical ill-posed problem in computer vision. By explicitly factorizing appearance and transfor-
mation, LR-GAN encodes natural priors about the images that the same foreground can be ‘pasted’
to the different backgrounds, under different afﬁne transformations. According to the experiments,
the absence of these priors result in degenerate foreground-background decompositions, and thus
also degenerate ﬁnal composite images.

∗Work was done while visiting Facebook AI Research.

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 1: Generation results of our model on CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). It generates images
in two timesteps. At the ﬁrst timestep, it generates background images, while generates foreground
images, masks and transformations at the second timestep. Then, they are composed to obtain the
ﬁnal images. From top left to bottom right (row major), the blocks are real images, generated
background images, foreground images, foreground masks, carved foreground images, carved and
transformed foreground images, ﬁnal composite images, and their nearest neighbor real images in
the training set. Note that the model is trained in a completely unsupervised manner.

We mainly evaluate our approach on four datasets: MNIST-ONE (one digit) and MNIST-TWO (two
digits) synthesized from MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) and
CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). We show qualitatively (via samples) and quantitatively (via evalu-
ation metrics and human studies on Amazon Mechanical Turk) that LR-GAN generates images that
globally look natural and contain clear background and object structures in them that are realistic
and recognizable by humans as semantic entities. An experimental snapshot on CUB-200 is shown
in Fig. 1. We also ﬁnd that LR-GAN generates foreground objects that are contextually relevant to
the backgrounds (e.g., horses on grass, airplanes in skies, ships in water, cars on streets, etc.). For
quantitative comparison, besides existing metrics in the literature, we propose two new quantitative
metrics to evaluate the quality of generated images. The proposed metrics are derived from the sufﬁ-
cient conditions for the closeness between generated image distribution and real image distribution,
and thus supplement existing metrics.

2 RELATED WORK

Early work in parametric texture synthesis was based on a set of hand-crafted features (Portilla &
Simoncelli, 2000). Recent improvements in image generation using deep neural networks mainly
fall into one of the two stochastic models: variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma et al., 2016)
and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). VAEs pair a top-down prob-
abilistic generative network with a bottom up recognition network for amortized probabilistic infer-
ence. Two networks are jointly trained to maximize a variational lower bound on the data likelihood.
GANs consist of a generator and a discriminator in a minmax game with the generator aiming to
fool the discriminator with its samples with the latter aiming to not get fooled.

Sequential models have been pivotal for improved image generation using variational autoencoders:
DRAW (Gregor et al., 2015) uses attention based recurrence conditioning on the canvas drawn so
far. In Eslami et al. (2016), a recurrent generative model that draws one object at a time to the
canvas was used as the decoder in VAE. These methods are yet to show scalability to natural images.
Early compelling results using GANs used sequential coarse-to-ﬁne multiscale generation and class-
conditioning (Denton et al., 2015). Since then, improved training schemes (Salimans et al., 2016)
and better convolutional structure (Radford et al., 2015) have improved the generation results using

2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

GANs. PixelRNN (van den Oord et al., 2016) is also recently proposed to sequentially generates a
pixel at a time, along the two spatial dimensions.

In this paper, we combine the merits of sequential generation with the ﬂexibility of GANs. Our
model for sequential generation imbibes a recursive structure that more naturally mimics image
composition by inferring three components: appearance, shape, and pose. One closely related work
combining recursive structure with GAN is that of Im et al. (2016) but it does not explicitly model
object composition and follows a similar paradigm as by Gregor et al. (2015). Another closely re-
lated work is that of Kwak & Zhang (2016). It combines recursive structure and alpha blending.
However, our work differs in three main ways: (1) We explicitly use a generator for modeling the
foreground poses. That provides signiﬁcant advantage for natural images, as shown by our ablation
studies; (2) Our shape generator is separate from the appearance generator. This factored repre-
sentation allows more ﬂexibility in the generated scenes; (3) Our recursive framework generates
subsequent objects conditioned on the current and previous hidden vectors, and previously gener-
ated object. This allows for explicit contextual modeling among generated elements in the scene.
See Fig. 17 for contextually relevant foregrounds generated for the same background, or Fig. 6 for
meaningful placement of two MNIST digits relative to each.

Models that provide supervision to image generation using conditioning variables have also been
proposed: Style/Structure GANs (Wang & Gupta, 2016) learns separate generative models for style
and structure that are then composed to obtain ﬁnal images. In Reed et al. (2016a), GAN based
image generation is conditioned on text and the region in the image where the text manifests, spec-
iﬁed during training via keypoints or bounding boxes. While not the focus of our work, the model
proposed in this paper can be easily extended to take into account these forms of supervision.

3 PRELIMINARIES

3.1 GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) consist of a generator G and a discriminator D that are
simultaneously trained with competing goals: The generator G is trained to generate samples that
can ‘fool’ a discriminator D, while the discriminator is trained to classify its inputs as either real
(coming from the training dataset) or fake (coming from the samples of G). This competition leads
to a minmax formulation with a value function:

Ex∼pdata(x)[log(D(x; θD))] + Ez∼pz(z)[log(1 − D(G(z; θG); θD))]

(1)

(cid:17)

,

(cid:16)

min
θG

max
θD

where z is a random vector from a standard multivariate Gaussian or a uniform distribution pz(z),
G(z; θG) maps z to the data space, D(x) is the probability that x is real estimated by D. The
advantage of the GANs formulation is that it lacks an explicit loss function and instead uses the
discriminator to optimize the generative model. The discriminator, in turn, only cares whether the
sample it receives is on the data manifold, and not whether it exactly matches a particular training
example (as opposed to losses such as MSE). Hence, the discriminator provides a gradient signal
only when the generated samples do not lie on the data manifold so that the generator can readjust
its parameters accordingly. This form of training enables learning the data manifold of the training
set and not just optimizing to reconstruct the dataset, as in autoencoder and its variants.

While the GANs framework is largely agnostic to the choice of G and D, it is clear that generative
models with the ‘right’ inductive biases will be more effective in learning from the gradient infor-
mation (Denton et al., 2015; Im et al., 2016; Gregor et al., 2015; Reed et al., 2016a; Yan et al., 2015).
With this motivation, we propose a generator that models image generation via a recurrent process
– in each time step of the recurrence, an object with its own appearance and shape is generated and
warped according to a generated pose to compose an image in layers.

3.2 LAYERED STRUCTURE OF IMAGE

An image taken of our 3D world typically contains a layered structure. One way of representing an
image layer is by its appearance and shape. As an example, an image x with two layers, foreground
f and background b may be factorized as:

x = f (cid:12) m + b (cid:12) (1 − m),

(2)

3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

where m is the mask depicting the shapes of image layers, and (cid:12) the element wise multiplication
operator. Some existing methods assume the access to the shape of the object either during training
(Isola & Liu, 2013) or both at train and test time (Reed et al., 2016a; Yan et al., 2015). Representing
images in layered structure is even straightforward for video with moving objects (Darrell & Pent-
land, 1991; Wang & Adelson, 1994; Kannan et al., 2005). Vondrick et al. (2016) generates videos
by separately generating a ﬁxed background and moving foregrounds. A similar way of generating
single image can be found in Kwak & Zhang (2016).

Another way is modeling the layered structure with object appearance and pose as:

x = ST (f , a) + b,

(3)

where f and b are foreground and background, respectively; a is the afﬁne transformation; ST is
the spatial transformation operator. Several works fall into this group (Roux et al., 2011; Huang &
Murphy, 2015; Eslami et al., 2016). In Huang & Murphy (2015), images are decomposed into layers
of objects with speciﬁc poses in a variational autoencoder framework, while the number of objects
(i.e., layers) is adaptively estimated in Eslami et al. (2016).

To contrast with these works, LR-GAN uses a layered composition, and the foreground layers si-
multaneously model all three dominant factors of variation: appearance f , shape m and pose a. We
will elaborate it in the following section.

4 LAYERED RECURSIVE GAN (LR-GAN)

The basic structure of LR-GAN is similar to GAN: it consists of a discriminator and a generator that
are simultaneously trained using the minmax formulation of GAN, as described in §.3.1. The key
innovation of our work is the layered recursive generator, which is what we describe in this section.

The generator in LR-GAN is recursive in that the image is constructed recursively using a recurrent
network. Layered in that each recursive step composes an object layer that is ‘pasted’ on the image
generated so far. Object layer at timestep t is parameterized by the following three constituents –
‘canonical’ appearance ft, shape (or mask) mt, and pose (or afﬁne transformation) at for warping
the object before pasting in the image composition.

Fig. 2 shows the architecture of the LR-GAN with the generator architecture unrolled for generating
.
background x0 (
= xb) and foreground x1 and x2. At each time step t, the generator composes the
next image xt via the following recursive computation:

xt = ST (mt, at)
(cid:125)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
afﬁne transformed mask

(cid:124)

(cid:12)

ST (ft, at)
(cid:125)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
(cid:124)
afﬁne transformed appearance

,
+ (1 − ST (mt, at)) (cid:12) xt−1
(cid:125)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
pasting on image composed so far

(cid:124)

∀t ∈ [1, T ]

(4)

where ST ((cid:5), at) is a spatial transformation operator that outputs the afﬁne transformed version of
(cid:5) with at indicating parameters of the afﬁne transformation.

Since our proposed model has an explicit transformation variable at that is used to warp the object,
it can learn a canonical object representation that can be re-used to generate scenes where the ob-
ject occurs as mere transformations of it, such as different scales or rotations. By factorizing the
appearance, shape and pose, the object generator can focus on separately capturing regularities in
these three factors that constitute an object. We will demonstrate in our experiments that removing
these factorizations from the model leads to its spending capacity in variability that may not solely
be about the object in Section 5.5 and 5.6.

4.1 DETAILS OF GENERATOR ARCHITECTURE

Fig. 2 shows our LR-GAN architecture in detail – we use different shapes to indicate different kinds
of layers (convolutional, fractional convolutional, (non)linear, etc), as indicated by the legend. Our
model consists of two main pieces – a background generator Gb and a foreground generator Gf . Gb
and Gf do not share parameters with each other. Gb computation happens only once, while Gf is
recurrent over time, i.e., all object generators share the same parameters. In the following, we will
introduce each module and connections between them.

Temporal Connections. LR-GAN has two kinds of temporal connections – informally speaking,
one on ‘top’ and one on ‘bottom’. The ‘top’ connections perform the act of sequentially ‘pasting’

4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 2: LR-GAN architecture unfolded to three timesteps. It mainly consists of one background
generator, one foreground generator, temporal connections and one discriminator. The meaning of
each component is explained in the legend.

object layers (Eqn. 4). The ‘bottom’ connections are constructed by a LSTM on the noise vectors
z0, z1, z2. Intuitively, this noise-vector-LSTM provides information to the foreground generator
about what else has been generated in past. Besides, when generating multiple objects, we use a
pooling layer P c
f to extract the information from previous generated
object response map. By this way, the model is able to ‘see’ previously generated objects.

f and a fully-connected layer Ec

Background Generator. The background generator Gb is purposely kept simple. It takes the hidden
state of noise-vector-LSTM h0
l as the input and passes it to a number of fractional convolutional
layers (also called ‘deconvolution’ layer in some papers) to generate images at its end. The output
of background generator xb will be used as the canvas for the following generated foregrounds.

f . Gi

f and Gm

Foreground Generator. The foreground generator Gf is used to generate an object with appearance
and shape. Correspondingly, Gf consists of three sub-modules, Gc
f , which is a common ‘trunk’
whose outputs are shared by Gi
f is used to generate the foreground appearance ft,
while Gm
f generates the mask mt for the foreground. All three sub-modules consists of one or
more fractional convolutional layers combined with batch-normalization and nonlinear layers. The
generated foreground appearance and mask have the same spatial size as the background. The top
of Gm
f is a sigmoid layer in order to generate one channel mask whose values range in (0, 1).
Spatial Transformer. To spatially transform foreground objects, we need to estimate the trans-
formation matrix. As in Jaderberg et al. (2015), we predict the afﬁne transformation matrix with a
linear layer Tf that has six-dimensional outputs. Then based on the predicted transformation matrix,
we use a grid generator Gg to generate the corresponding sampling coordinates in the input for each
location at the output. The generated foreground appearance and mask share the same transforma-
tion matrix, and thus the same sampling grid. Given the grid, the sampler S will simultaneously
sample the ft and mt to obtain ˆft and ˆmt, respectively. Different from Jaderberg et al. (2015),
our sampler here normally performs downsampling, since the the foreground typically has smaller
size than the background. Pixels in ˆft and ˆmt that are from outside the extent of ft and mt are set
to zero. Finally, ˆft and ˆmt are sent to the compositor C which combines the canvas xt−1 and ˆft
through layered composition with blending weights given by ˆmt (Eqn. 4).

Pseudo-code for our approach and detailed model conﬁguration are provided in the Appendix.

5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

4.2 NEW EVALUATION METRICS

Several metrics have been proposed to evaluate GANs, such as Gaussian parzen window (Good-
fellow et al., 2014), Generative Adversarial Metric (GAM) (Im et al., 2016) and Inception Score
(Salimans et al., 2016). The common goal is to measure the similarity between the generated data
distribution Pg(x) = G(z; θz) and the real data distribution P (x). Most recently, Inception Score
has been used in several works (Salimans et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2016). However, it is an assymetric
metric and could be easily fooled by generating centers of data modes.

In addition to these metrics, we present two new metrics based on the following intuition – a suf-
ﬁcient (but not necessary) condition for closeness of Pg(x) and P (x) is closeness of Pg(x|y) and
P (x|y), i.e., distributions of generated data and real data conditioned on all possible variables of
interest y, e.g., category label. One way to obtain this variable of interest y is via human annotation.
Speciﬁcally, given the data sampled from Pg(x) and P (x), we ask people to label the category of the
samples according to some rules. Note that such human annotation is often easier than comparing
samples from the two distributions (e.g., because there is no 1:1 correspondence between samples
to conduct forced-choice tests).

After the annotations, we need to verify whether the two distributions are similar in each category.
Clearly, directly comparing the distributions Pg(x|y) and P (x|y) may be as difﬁcult as compar-
ing Pg(x) and P (x). Fortunately, we can use Bayes rule and alternatively compare Pg(y|x) and
P (y|x), which is a much easier task. In this case, we can simply train a discriminative model on
the samples from Pg(x) and P (x) together with the human annotations about categories of these
samples. With a slight abuse of notation, we use Pg(y|x) and P (y|x) to denote probability outputs
from these two classiﬁers (trained on generated samples vs trained on real samples). We can then
use these two classiﬁers to compute the following two evaluation metrics:

Adversarial Accuracy: Computes the classiﬁcation accuracies achieved by these two classiﬁers on
a validation set, which can be the training set or another set of real images sampled from P (x). If
Pg(x) is close to P (x), we expect to see similar accuracies.

Adversarial Divergence: Computes the KL divergence between Pg(y|x) and P (y|x). The lower
the adversarial divergence, the closer two distributions are. The low bound for this metric is exactly
zero, which means Pg(y|x) = P (y|x) for all samples in the validation set.

As discussed above, we need human efforts to label the real and generated samples. Fortunately, we
can further simplify this. Based on the labels given on training data, we split the training data into
categories, and train one generator for each category. With all these generators, we generate samples
of all categories. This strategy will be used in our experiments on the datasets with labels given.

5 EXPERIMENT

We conduct qualitative and quantitative evaluations on three datasets: 1) MNIST (LeCun et al.,
1998); 2) CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009); 3) CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). To add
variability to the MNIST images, we randomly scale (factor of 0.8 to 1.2) and rotate (− π
4 ) the
digits and then stitch them to 48 × 48 uniform backgrounds with random grayscale value between
[0, 200]. Images are then rescaled back to 32 × 32. Each image thus has a different background
grayscale value and a different transformed digit as foreground. We rename this sythensized dataset
as MNIST-ONE (single digit on a gray background). We also synthesize a dataset MNIST-TWO
containing two digits on a grayscale background. We randomly select two images of digits and
perform similar transformations as described above, and put one on the left and the other on the
right side of a 78 × 78 gray background. We resize the whole image to 64 × 64.

4 to π

We develop LR-GAN based on open source code1. We assume the number of objects is known.
Therefore, for MNIST-ONE, MNIST-TWO, CIFAR-10, and CUB-200, our model has two, three,
two, and two timesteps, respectively. Since the size of foreground object should be smaller than
that of canvas, we set the minimal allowed scale 2 in afﬁne transforamtion to be 1.2 for all datasets
except for MNIST-TWO, which is set to 2 (objects are smaller in MNIST-TWO). In LR-GAN, the

1https://github.com/soumith/dcgan.torch
2Scale corresponds to the size of the target canvas with respect to the object – the larger the scale, the larger

the canvas, and the smaller the relative size of the object in the canvas. 1 means the same size as the canvas.

6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 3: Generated images on CIFAR-10 based on our model.

Figure 4: Generated images on CUB-200 based on our model.

background generator and foreground generator have similar architectures. One difference is that
the number of channels in the background generator is half of the one in the foreground generator.
We compare our results to that of DCGAN (Radford et al., 2015). Note that LR-GAN without
LSTM at the ﬁrst timestep corresponds exactly to the DCGAN. This allows us to run controlled
experiments. In both generator and discriminator, all the (fractional) convolutional layers have 4 ×
4 ﬁlter size with stride 2. As a result, the number of layers in the generator and discriminator
automatically adapt to the size of training images. Please see the Appendix (Section 6.2) for details
about the conﬁgurations. We use three metrics for quantitative evaluation, including Inception Score
(Salimans et al., 2016) and the proposed Adversarial Accuracy, Adversarial Divergence. Note that
we report two versions of Inception Score. One is based on the pre-trained Inception net, and the
other one is based on the pre-trained classiﬁer on the target datasets.

5.1 QUALITATIVE RESULTS

In Fig. 3 and 4, we show the generated samples for CIFAR-10 and CUB-200, respectively. MNIST
results are shown in the next subsection. As we can see from the images, the compositional nature
of our model results in the images being free of blending artifacts between backgrounds and fore-
grounds. For CIFAR-10, we can see the horses and cars with clear shapes. For CUB-200, the bird
shapes tend to be even sharper.

5.2 MNIST-ONE AND MNIST-TWO

We now report the results on MNIST-ONE and MNIST-TWO. Fig. 5 shows the generation results of
our model on MNIST-ONE. As we can see, our model generates the background and the foreground
in separate timestep, and can disentagle the foreground digits from background nearly perfectly.
Though initial values of the mask randomly distribute in the range of (0, 1), after training, the masks
are nearly binary and accurately carve out the digits from the generated foreground. More results on
MNIST-ONE (including human studies) can be found in the Appendix (Section 6.3).

Fig. 6 shows the generation results for MNIST-TWO. Similarly, the model is also able to generate
background and the two foreground objects separately. The foreground generator tends to generate
a single digit at each timestep. Meanwhile, it captures the context information from the previous
time steps. When the ﬁrst digit is placed to the left side, the second one tends to be placed on the
right side, and vice versa.

7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 5: Generation results of our model on MNIST-ONE. From left to right, the image blocks are
real images, generated background images, generated foreground images, generated masks and ﬁnal
composite images, respectively.

Figure 6: Generation results of our model on MNIST-TWO. From top left to bottom right (row
major), the image blocks are real images, generated background images, foreground images and
masks at the second timestep, composite images at the second time step, generated foreground
images and masks at the third timestep and the ﬁnal composite images, respectively.

5.3 CUB-200

We study the effectiveness of our model trained on the CUB-200 bird dataset. In Fig. 1, we have
shown a random set of generated images, along with the intermediate generation results of the model.
While being completely unsupervised, the model, for a large fraction of the samples, is able to

Figure 7: Matched pairs of generated images based on DCGAN and LR-GAN, respectivedly. The
odd columns are generated by DCGAN, and the even columns are generated by LR-GAN. These
are paired according to the perfect matching based on Hungarian algorithm.

8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 8: Qualitative comparison on CIFAR-10. Top three rows are images generated by DCGAN;
Bottom three rows are by LR-GAN. From left to right, the blocks display generated images with
increasing quality level as determined by human studies.

successfully disentangle the foreground and the background. This is evident from the generated
bird-like masks.

We do a comparative study based on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) between DCGAN and LR-
GAN to quantify relative visual quality of the generated images. We ﬁrst generated 1000 samples
from both the models. Then, we performed perfect matching between the two image sets using
the Hungarian algorithm on L2 norm distance in the pixel space. This resulted in 1000 image
pairs. Some examplar pairs are shown in Fig. 7. For each image pair, 9 judges are asked to choose
the one that is more realistic. Based on majority voting, we ﬁnd that our generated images are
selected 68.4% times, compared with 31.6% times for DCGAN. This demonstrates that our model
has generated more realistic images than DCGAN. We can attribute this difference to our model’s
ability to generate foreground separately from the background, enabling stronger edge cues.

5.4 CIFAR-10

We now qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate our model on CIFAR-10, which contains multiple
object categories and also various backgrounds.

Comparison of image generation quality: We conduct AMT studies to compare the ﬁdelity of
image generation. Towards this goal, we generate 1000 images from DCGAN and LR-GAN, re-
spectively. We ask 5 judges to label each image to either belong to one of the 10 categories or as
‘non recognizable’ or ‘recognizable but not belonging to the listed categories’. We then assign each
image a quality level between [0,5] that captures the number of judges that agree with the majority
choice. Fig. 8 shows the images generated by both approaches, ordered by increasing quality level.
We merge images at quality level 0 (all judges said non-recognizable) and 1 together, and similarly
images at level 4 and 5. Visually, the generated samples by our model have clearer boundaries and
object structures. We also computed the fraction of non-recognizable images: Our model had a 10%
absolute drop in non-recognizability rate (67.3% for ours vs. 77.7% for DCGAN). For reference,
11.4% of real CIFAR images were categorized as non-recognizable. Fig. 9 shows more generated
(intermediate) results of our model.

Quantitative evaluation on generators: We evaluate the generators based on three metrics: 1)
Inception Score; 2) Adversarial Accuracy; 3) Adversarial Divergence. To obtain a classiﬁer model
for evaluation, we remove the top layer in the discriminator used in our model, and then append
two fully connected layers on the top of it. We train this classiﬁer using the training samples of
CIFAR-10 based on the annotations. Following Salimans et al. (2016), we generated 50,000 images

Table 1: Quantitative comparison between DCGAN and LR-GAN on CIFAR-10.

Training Data

Real Images

DCGAN

Ours

Inception Score†
Inception Score††
Adversarial Accuracy
Adversarial Divergence
†Evaluate using the pre-trained Inception net as Salimans et al. (2016)
††Evaluate using the supervisedly trained classiﬁer based on the discriminator in LR-GAN.

7.17±0.07
6.11±0.06
44.22 ±0.08
5.57±0.06

6.64±0.14
5.69±0.07
37.81±0.02
7.58±0.04

11.18±0.18
7.23±0.09
83.33±0.08
0

9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 9: Generation results of our model on CIFAR-10. From left to right, the blocks are: gener-
ated background images, foreground images, foreground masks, foreground images carved out by
masks, carved foregrounds after spatial transformation, ﬁnal composite images and nearest neighbor
training images to the generated images.

Figure 10: Category speciﬁc generation results of our model on CIFAR-10 categories of horse, frog,
and cat (top to bottom). The blocks from left to right are: generated background images, foreground
images, foreground masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved foregrounds after spatial
transformation and ﬁnal composite images.

based on DCGAN and LR-GAN, repsectively. We compute two types of Inception Scores. The
standard Inception Score is based on the Inception net as in Salimans et al. (2016), and the contex-
tual Inception Score is based on our trained classiﬁer model. To distinguish, we denote the standard
one as ‘Inception Score†’, and the contextual one as ‘Inception Score††’. To obtain the Adversarial
Accuracy and Adversarial Divergence scores, we train one generator on each of 10 categories for
DCGAN and LR-GAN, respectively. Then, we use these generators to generate samples of different
categories. Given these generated samples, we train the classiﬁers for DCGAN and LR-GAN sepa-
rately. Along with the classiﬁer trained on the real samples, we compute the Adversarial Accuracy

10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

and Adversarial Divergence on the real training samples. In Table 1, we report the Inception Scores,
Adversarial Accuracy and Adversarial Divergence for comparison. We can see that our model out-
performs DCGAN across the board. To point out, we obtan different Inception Scores based on
different classiﬁer models, which indicates that the Inception Score varies with different models.

Quantitative evaluation on discriminators: We evaluate the discriminator as an extractor for deep
representations. Speciﬁcally, we use the output of the last convolutional layer in the discriminator
as features. We perform a 1-NN classiﬁcation on the test set given the full training set. Cosine
similarity is used as the metric. On the test set, our model achieves 62.09%±0.01% compared to
DCGAN’s 56.05%±0.02%.

Contextual generation: We also show the efﬁcacy of our approach to generate diverse foregrounds
conditioned on ﬁxed background. The results in Fig. 17 in Appendix showcase that the foreground
generator generates objects that are compatible with the background. This indicates that the model
has captured contextual dependencies between the image layers.

Category speciﬁc models: The objects in CIFAR-10 exhibit huge variability in shapes. That can
partly explain why some of the generated shapes are not as compelling in Fig. 9. To test this hy-
pothesis, we reuse the generators trained for each of 10 categories used in our metrics to obtain the
generation results. Fig. 10 shows results for categories ‘horse’, ‘frog’ and ‘cat’. We can see that the
model is now able to generate object-speciﬁc appearances and shapes, similar in vein to our results
on the CUB-200 dataset.

5.5

IMPORTANCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS

Figure 11: Generation results from an ablated LR-GAN model without afﬁne transformations. From
top to bottom, the block rows correspond to different datasets: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10.
From left to right, the blocks show generated background images, foreground images, foreground
masks, and ﬁnal composite images. For comparison, the rightmost column block shows ﬁnal gener-
ated images from a non-ablated model with afﬁne transformations.

Fig. 11 shows results from an ablated model without afﬁne transformations in the foreground layers,
and compares the results with the full model that does include these transformations. We note that
one signiﬁcant problem emerges that the decompositions are degenerate, in the sense that the model
is unable to break the symmetry between foreground and background layers, often generating object
appearances in the model’s background layer and vice versa. For CUB-200, the ﬁnal generated im-
ages have some blendings between foregrounds and backgrounds. This is particularly the case for

11

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 12: Generation results from an ablated LR-GAN model without mask generator. The block
rows correspond to different datasets (from top to bottom: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10).
From left to right, the blocks show generated background images, foreground images, transformed
foreground images, and ﬁnal composite images. For comparison, the rightmost column block shows
ﬁnal generated images from a non-ablated model with mask generator.

those images without bird-shape masks. For CIFAR-10, a number of generated masks are inverted.
In this case, the background images are carved out as the foreground objects. The foreground gener-
ator takes almost all the duty to generate the ﬁnal images, which make it harder to generate images
as clear as the model with transformation. From these comparisons, we qualitatively demonstrate
the importance of modeling transformations in the foreground generation process. Another merit of
using transformation is that the intermediate outputs of the model are more interpretable and faciliate
to the downstreaming tasks, such as scene paring, which is demonstrated in Section 6.8.

5.6

IMPORTANCE OF SHAPES

We perform another ablation study by removing the mask generator to understand the importance
of modeling object shapes. In this case, the generated foreground is simply pasted on top of the
generated background after being transformed. There is no alpha blending between the foregrounds
and backgrounds. The generation results for three datasets, MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 are
shown in Fig. 12. As we can see, though the model works well for the generation of MNIST-ONE, it
fails to generate reasonable images across the other datasets. Particularly, the training does not even
converge for CUB-200. Based on these results, we qualitatively demonstrate that mask generator in
our model is fairly important to obtain plausible results, especially for realistic images.

REFERENCES

Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel.

Info-
gan: Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03657, 2016.

Trevor Darrell and Alex Pentland. Robust estimation of a multi-layered motion representation. IEEE

Workshop on Visual Motion, 1991.

12

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Emily L Denton, Soumith Chintala, Rob Fergus, et al. Deep generative image models using a
laplacian pyramid of adversarial networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
pp. 1486–1494, 2015.

S. M. Ali Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Geof-
frey E. Hinton. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with generative models. CoRR,
abs/1603.08575, 2016.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, pp. 2672–2680, 2014.

Karol Gregor, Ivo Danihelka, Alex Graves, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Draw: A

recurrent neural network for image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.046239, 2015.

Gary B. Huang, Manu Ramesh, Tamara Berg, and Erik Learned-Miller. Labeled faces in the wild:
A database for studying face recognition in unconstrained environments. Technical Report 07-49,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, October 2007.

Jonathan Huang and Kevin Murphy. Efﬁcient inference in occlusion-aware generative models of

images. CoRR, abs/1511.06362, 2015.

Daniel Jiwoong Im, Chris Dongjoo Kim, Hui Jiang, and Roland Memisevic. Generating images

with recurrent adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.05110, 2016.

Phillip Isola and Ce Liu. Scene collaging: Analysis and synthesis of natural images with semantic

layers. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3048–3055, 2013.

Max Jaderberg, Karen Simonyan, Andrew Zisserman, and koray kavukcuoglu. Spatial transformer
networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28, pp. 2017–2025, 2015.

Anitha Kannan, Nebojsa Jojic, and Brendan Frey. Generative model for layers of appearance and

deformation. AISTATS, 2005.

Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, and Max Welling. Improving variational inference with inverse

autoregressive ﬂow. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04934, 2016.

Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Hanock Kwak and Byoung-Tak Zhang. Generating images part by part with composite generative

adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05387, 2016.

Yann LeCun, L´eon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to

document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.

Elman Mansimov, Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Generating images

from captions with attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02793, 2015.

Javier Portilla and Eero P Simoncelli. A parametric texture model based on joint statistics of com-

plex wavelet coefﬁcients. International journal of computer vision, 40(1):49–70, 2000.

Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep

convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.

Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Santosh Mohan, Samuel Tenka, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee. Learn-

ing what and where to draw. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02454, 2016a.

Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee.

Generative adversarial text to image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.05396, 2016b.

Nicolas Le Roux, Nicolas Heess, Jamie Shotton, and John Winn. Learning a generative model of

images by factoring appearance and shape. Neural Computation, 23:593–650, 2011.

Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.

Improved techniques for training gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03498, 2016.

13

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

A¨aron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural networks.

CoRR, abs/1601.06759, 2016.

Carl Vondrick, Hamed Pirsiavash, and Antonio Torralba. Generating videos with scene dynamics.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02612, 2016.

John Wang and Edward Adelson. Representing moving images with layers. IEEE Transactions on

Image Processing, 1994.

Xiaolong Wang and Abhinav Gupta. Generative image modeling using style and structure adversar-

ial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.05631, 2016.

P. Welinder, S. Branson, T. Mita, C. Wah, F. Schroff, S. Belongie, and P. Perona. Caltech-UCSD

Birds 200. Technical Report CNS-TR-2010-001, California Institute of Technology, 2010.

Xinchen Yan, Jimei Yang, Kihyuk Sohn, and Honglak Lee. Attribute2image: Conditional image

generation from visual attributes. CoRR, abs/1512.00570, 2015.

Junbo Zhao, Michael Mathieu, and Yann LeCun. Energy-based generative adversarial network.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03126, 2016.

Jun-Yan Zhu, Philipp Kr¨ahenb¨uhl, Eli Shechtman, and Alexei A Efros. Generative visual manipu-
lation on the natural image manifold. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 597–613.
Springer, 2016.

6 APPENDIX

6.1 ALGORITHM

Algo. 1 illustrates the generative process in our model. g((cid:63)) evaluates the function g at (cid:63). ◦ is a
composition operator that composes its operands so that f ◦ g((cid:63)) = f (g((cid:63))).

(cid:46) background generator

(cid:46) pass through LSTM

Algorithm 1 Stochastic Layered Recursive Image Generation

l

])

, ct−1
l

l ← LSTM([zt, ht−1

zt ∼ N (0, I)
ht
l, ct
if t = 1 then
yt ← ht
l

1: z0 ∼ N (0, I)
2: x0 = Gb(z0)
3: h0
l ← 0
4: c0
l ← 0
5: for t ∈ [1 · · · T ] do
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16: mt ← Gm
ht
f ← Ec
17:
xt ← ST (mt, at) (cid:12) ST (ft, at) + (1 − ST (mt, at)) (cid:12) xt−1
18:
19: end for

end if
st ← Gc
f (yt)
at ← Tf (yt)
ft ← Gi
f (st)
f (st)
f ◦ P c

yt ← El

l ht−1

f ([ht

f (st)

else

])

f

(cid:46) pass through non-linear embedding layers El
f

(cid:46) predict shared cube for Gi

f and Gm
f
(cid:46) object transformation
(cid:46) generate object appearance
(cid:46) generate object shape
(cid:46) predict shared represenation embedding

6.2 MODEL CONFIGURATIONS

Table 2 lists the information and model conﬁguration for different datasets. The dimensions of
random vectors and hidden vectors are all set to 100. We also compare the number of parameters in
DCGAN and LR-GAN. The numbers before ‘/’ are our model, after ‘/’ are DCGAN. Based on the
same notation used in (Zhao et al., 2016), the architectures for the different datasets are:

14

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Table 2: Information and model conﬁgurations on different datasets.

Dataset

MNIST-ONE MNIST-TWO

CIFAR-10

CUB-200

Image Size
#Images
#Timesteps
#Parameters

32
60,000
2

64
60,000
3

32
50,000
2

64
5,994
2

5.25M/4.11M 7.53M/6.33M 5.26M/4.11M 27.3M/6.34M

• MNIST-ONE: Gb:

(256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc
f :

(512)4c-(256)4c2s-

(128)4c2s; Gi

f : (3)4c2s; Gm

f : (1)4c2s; D: (64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(256)4p4s-1

• MNIST-TWO: Gb:

(256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(32)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc
f :

(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s; Gi
f :
(256)4c2s-(512)4c2s-(512)4p4s-1

(3)4c2s; Gm
f :

(1)4c2s;D:

(512)4c-
(64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-

• CUB-200: Gb: (512)4c-(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc

(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s; Gi
f :
(1024)4c2s-(1024)4p4s-1

(3)4c2s; Gm
f :

(1)4c2s;D:

f : (1024)4c-(512)4c2s-
(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(512)4c2s-

• CIFAR-10: Gb: (256)4c-(128)4c2s-(64)4c2s-(3)4c2s; Gc

f : (512)4c-(256)4c2s-(128)4c2s;

Gi

f : (3)4c2s; Gm

f : (1)4c2s D: (64)4c2s-(128)4c2s-(256)4c2s-(256)4p4s-1

6.3 RESULTS ON MNIST-ONE

We conduct human studies on generation results on MNIST-ONE. Speciﬁcally, we generate 1,000
images using both LR-GAN and DCGAN. As references, we also include 1000 real images. Then
we ask the users on AMT to label each image to be one of the digits (0-9). We also provide them
an option ‘non recognizable’ in case the generated image does not seem to contain a digit. Each
image was judged by 5 unique workers. Similar to CIFAR-10, if an image is recognized to be the
same digit by all 5 users, it is assigned to quality level 5. If it is not recognizable according to all
users, it is assigned to quality level 0. Fig. 13 (left) shows the number of images assigned to all six
quality levels. Compared to DCGAN, our model generated more samples with high quality levels.
As expected, the real images have many samples with high quality levels. In Fig. 13 (right), we show
the number of images that are recognized to each digit category (0-9). For qualitative comparison,
we show examplar images at each quality level in Fig. 14. From left to right, the quality level
increases from 0 to 5. As expected, the images with higher quality level are more clear.

For quantitative evaluation, we use the same way as for CIFAR-10. The classiﬁer model used for
contextual Inception Score is trained based on the training set. We generate 60,000 samples based
on DCGAN and LR-GAN for evaluation, respectively. To obtain the Adversarial Accuracy and
Adversarial Divergence, we ﬁrst train 10 generators for 10 digit categories separately, and then use
the generated samples to train the classiﬁer. As shown in Table 3, our model has higher scores than
DCGAN on both standard and contextual Inception Score. Also, our model has a slightly higher

Figure 13: Statistics of annotations in human studies on MNIST-ONE. Left: distribution of quality
level; Right: distribution of recognized digit categories.

15

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 14: Qualitative comparison on MNIST-ONE. Top three rows are samples generated by DC-
GAN. Bottom three rows are samples generated by LR-GAN. The quality level increases from left
to right as determined via human studies.

Table 3: Quantitative comparison on MNIST-ONE.

Training Data

Real Images

DCGAN

Ours

Inception Score†
Inception Score††
Adversarial Accuracy
Adversarial Divergence Score
†Evaluate using the pre-trained Inception net as Salimans et al. (2016)
††Evaluate using the supervisedly trained classiﬁer based on the discriminator in LR-GAN.

2.03±0.01
6.42±0.03
26.12 ± 0.07
8.47 ± 0.03

1.83±0.01
9.15±0.04
95.22 ± 0.25
0

2.06±0.01
7.15±0.04
26.61 ± 0.06
8.39 ± 0.04

adversarial accuracy, and lower adversarial divergence than DCGAN. We ﬁnd that the all three
image sets have low standard Inception Scores. This is mainly because the Inception net is trained
on ImageNet, which has a very different data distribution from the MNIST dataset. Based on this,
we argue that the standard Inception Score is not suitable for some image datasets.

6.4 MORE RESULTS ON CUB-200

In this experiment, we reduce the minimal allowed object scale to 1.1, which allows the model to
generate larger foreground objects. The results are shown in Fig. 15. Similar to the results when the
constraint is 1.2, the crisp bird-like masks are generated automatically by our model.

Figure 15: Generation results of our model on CUB-200 when setting minimal allowed scale to
1.1. From left to right, the blocks show the generated background images, foreground images,
foreground masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved foreground images after spatial
transformation. The sixth and seventh blocks are ﬁnal composite images and the nearest neighbor
real images.

16

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

6.5 MORE RESULTS ON CIFAR-10

6.5.1 QUALITATIVE RESULTS

In Fig. 16, we show more results on CIFAR-10 when setting minimal allowed object scale to 1.1.
The rightmost column block also shows the training images that are closest to the generated images
(cosine similarity in pixel space). We can see our model does not memorize the training data.

Figure 16: Generation results of our model on CIFAR-10 with minimal allowed scale be 1.1, From
left to right, the layout is same to Fig. 15.

6.5.2 WALKING IN THE LATENT SPACE

Similar to DCGAN, we also show results by walking in the latent space. Note that our model has
two or more inputs. So we can walk along any of them or their combination. In Fig. 17, we generate
multiple foregrounds for the same ﬁxed generated background. We ﬁnd that our model consistently
generates contextually compatible foregrounds. For example, for the grass-like backgrounds, the
foreground generator generates horses and deer, and airplane-like objects for the blue sky.

6.5.3 WORD CLOUD BASED ON HUMAN STUDY

As we mentioned above, we conducted human studies on CIFAR-10. Besides asking people to select
a name from a list for an image, we also conducted another human study where we ask people to use
one word (free-form) to describe the main object in the image. Each image was ‘named’ by 5 unique
people. We generate word clouds for real images, images generated by DCGAN and LR-GAN, as
shown in Fig. 18.

6.6 RESULTS ON LFW FACE DATASET

We conduct experiment on face images in LFW dataset (Huang et al., 2007). Different from previous
works which work on cropped and aligned faces, we directly generate the original images which
contains a large portion of backgrounds. This conﬁguration helps to verify the efﬁciency of LR-GAN
to model the object appearance, shape and pose. In Fig. 19, we show the (intermediate) generation
results of LR-GAN. Surprisingly, without any supervisions, the model generated background and
faces in separate steps, and the generated masks accurately depict face shapes. Moreover, the model

17

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 17: Walking in the latent foreground space by ﬁxing backgrounds in our model on CIFAR-
10. From left to right, the blocks are: generated background images, foreground images, foreground
masks, foreground images carved out by masks, carved out foreground images after spatial transfor-
mation, and ﬁnal composite images. Each row has the same background, but different foregrounds.

Figure 18: Statistics of annotations in human studies on CIFAR-10. Left to right: word cloud for
real images, images generated by DCGAN, images generated by LR-GAN.

Figure 19: Generation results of our model on LFW. From left to right, the blocks are: generated
background images, foreground images, foreground masks, carved out foreground images after spa-
tial transformation, and ﬁnal composite images.

learns where to place the generated faces so that the whole image looks natural. For comparison,

18

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

please refer to (Kwak & Zhang, 2016) which does not model the transformation. We can ﬁnd the
generation results degrade much.

6.7 STATISTICS ON TRANSFORMATION MATRICES

In this part, we analyze the statistics on the transformation matrices generated by our model for
different datasets, including MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 and LFW. We used afﬁne transfor-
mation in our model. So there are 6 parameters, scaling in the x coordinate (sx), scaling in the y
coordinate (sy), translation in the x coordinate (tx), translation in the y coordinate (ty), rotation in
the x coordinate (rx) and rotation in the y coordinate (ry). In Fig. 20, we show the histograms on dif-
ferent parameters for different datasets.These histograms show that the model produces non-trivial
varied scaling, translation and rotation on all datasets. For different datasets, the learned transfor-
mation have different patterns. We hypothesize that this is mainly determined by the conﬁgurations
of objects in the images. For example, on MNIST-ONE, all six parameters have some ﬂuctuations
since the synthetic dataset contains digits randomly placed at different locations. For the other three
datasets, the scalings converge to single value since the object sizes do not vary much, and the vari-
ations on rotation and translation sufﬁce to generate realistic images. Speciﬁcally, we can ﬁnd the
generator largely relies on the translation on x coordinate for generating CUB-200. This makes
sense since birds in the images have similar scales, orientations but various horizontal locations. For
CIFAR-10, since there are 10 different object categories, the conﬁgurations are more diverse, hence
the generator uses all parameters for generation except for the scaling. For LFW, since faces have
similar conﬁgurations, the learned transformations have less ﬂuctuation as well. As a result, we can
see that LR-GAN indeed models the transformations on the foreground to generate images.

6.8 CONDITIONAL IMAGE GENERATION

Considering our model can generate object-like masks (shapes) for images, we conducted an ex-
periment to evaluate whether our model can be potentially used for image segmentation and object
detection. We make some changes to the model. For the background generator, the input is a real
image instead of a random vector. Then the image is passed through an encoder to extract the hid-
den features, which replaces the random vector z0 and are fed to the background generator. For the
foreground generator, we subtract the image generated by the background generator from the input
image to obtain a residual image. Then this residual image is fed to the same encoder to get the
hidden features, which are used as the input for foreground generator. In our conditional model,
we want to reconstruct the image, so we add a reconstruction loss along with the adversarial loss.
We train this conditional model on CIFAR-10. The (intermediate) outputs of the model is shown
in Fig. 21. Interestingly, the model successfully learned to decompose the input images into back-
ground and foreground. The background generator tends to do an image inpainting by generating a
complete background without object, while the foreground generator works as a segmentation model
to get object mask from the input image.

Similarly, we also run the conditional LR-GAN on LFW dataset. As we can see in Fig. 22, the fore-
ground generator automatically and consistently learned to generate the face regions, even though
there are large portion of background in the input images. In other words, the conditional LR-GAN
successfully learned to detection faces in images. We suspect this success is due to that it has low
cost for the generator to generate similar images, and thus converge to the case that the ﬁrst generator
generate background, and the second generator generate face images.

Based on these experiments, we argue that our model can be possibly used for image segmentation
and object detection in a generative and unsupervised manner. One future work would be verifying
this by applying it to high-resolution and more complicate datasets.

19

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 20: Histograms of transformation parameters learnt in our model for different datasets. From
left to right, the datasets are: MNIST-ONE, CUB-200, CIFAR-10 and LFW. From top to bottom,
they are scaling sx, sy, translation tx, ty, and rotation rx, ry in x and y coordinate, respectively.

20

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

Figure 21: Conditional generation results of our model on CIFAR-10. From left to right, the blocks
are: real images, generated background images, foreground images, foreground masks, foreground
images carved out by masks, carved foreground images after spatial transformation, and ﬁnal com-
posite (reconstructed) images.

Figure 22: Conditional generation results of our model on LFW, displayed with the same layout to
Fig. 21.

21

