We Are Depleting Our Research Subject as We Are Investigating It:
In Language Technology, more Replication and Diversity Are Needed

Ant´onio Branco
University of Lisbon
NLX-Natural Language and Speech Group, Department of Informatics
Faculdade de Ciˆencias
Campo Grande, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal
antonio.branco@di.fc.ul.pt

Abstract
In this paper, we present an analysis indicating that, in language technology, as we are investigating natural language we are contributing
to deplete it in the sense that we are contributing to reduce the diversity of languages. To address this circumstance, we propose that
more replication and reproduction and more language diversity need to be taken into account in our research activities.

Keywords: science ethics, science policy,
guage policy.

language technology, human language diversity, replication of research results,

lan-

1.

Introduction

Natural language is a most extraordinary object of scientiﬁc
inquiry lending itself to be researched at least as a referen-
tial symbolic system, a socially effective type of behavior
or a class of specialized mental activities, and hopefully
one day as a principled uniﬁed combination of all its di-
mensions. As it is at the core of what distinctively human
nature may be, the approximately 7 000 human languages
existing in our planet are a most valuable treasure trove for
scientiﬁc inquiry on the human brain, mind and behavior,
and for advancing our understanding of ourselves and ﬁnd-
ing better technological solutions that improve our life and
heal us.
While informed laypersons are aware of the dramatic con-
sequences of the depletion of important natural resources,
from energy to bio-diversity and including potable water,
ozone layer among several others, they are much less, or not
at all aware of the threat hanging over language diversity.
Around one third of the world languages are at present vul-
nerable to become extinct according to UNESCO (Moseley,
2010). In this paper we start by pondering on the impact
that the very development of language science and technol-
ogy at large is having on language diversity. We will then
proceed with this analysis by narrowing the focus of our re-
ﬂection into a case study in the realm of language resources.
With the present paper, we aim at fostering the debate and
action on how language scientists and the research activities
on language science and technology, including on the de-
velopment of language resources, can be much more mind-
ful of the language diversity issue and must bring it to the
center stage of its mission. It is not only natural and human
heritage but also their very own object of research that is
being eroded as they are investigating it and because they
are investigating it they way that investigation is being un-
dertaken.

2. Monolingual vortex
In the prevailing model for the promotion and funding of
research, science progress is mostly driven by the soci-

etal priorities identiﬁed in the different countries and en-
tities supporting its development. The growth of scientiﬁc
knowledge is thus asymmetric among different areas, dif-
ferent disciplines inside a given area, different topics inside
a given discipline, etc.
Human language science and technology is no exception.
As in each country research tends to be prioritized mostly
towards its ofﬁcial or predominant language(s), a most sub-
stantial asymmetry here is the different research effort de-
voted to different languages. As a matter of fact, this asym-
metry could not be more extreme given that it tells apart one
language, viz. English, from all other languages. This was
neatly captured in the study of (Mariani and Frankopoulo,
2012), whose ﬁndings are summarized in Figure 1, where
the research effort devoted to English is ﬁve times larger
than the effort devoted to the second most researched lan-
guage, conﬁrmed by an independent study based on a dif-
ferent sample (Rehm and Uszkoreit, 2013), p. 10.
English is the predominant language of the United States,
the country that is the world superpower, and of a number
of other economically and scientiﬁcally highly developed
countries, including the United Kingdom, Canada and Aus-
tralia. All in all, it is the language of around 1/4 of the
world GDP — with the second language with the largest
share, Chinese, with only half of that GDP value, followed
by a long tail of other languages related to economies with
GDPs all below half of the Chinese score. But this extreme
asymmetry is not explained only by the funding model of
science. It results also from how science is produced and to
a Matthew effect of accumulated advantage this induces.
At some point or other of their doctoral research on lan-
guage technology, most students from a non English speak-
ing country had to face the decision on whether they pick
their mother tongue or English as the object language of
their study. Although English is not their native language,
it has many more language resources, processing tools and
applications available that can be reused, and many more
published research results on which further progress can be
built, and this offers a very clear picture: Adopting English

140

as the object language for their research substantially en-
hances their chances that more new results are produced
in less time, and hence their chances of eventually getting
more papers accepted for publication, a more visible dis-
sertation and a better career.
We all know many colleagues and students that when faced
with this individual choice understandably opted for their
immediate best interest and chose English. Regrettably,
in collective terms this represents the diverting of the very
few resources available in non English speaking countries
to support, again, research on English, thus further widen-
ing the gulf between advancing the research on English and
on the other languages, in detriment of the latter.
This is a self-reinforcing draining effect that is active at
many levels that further reinforce each other: When se-
nior researchers decide which research themes to pursue
that could be more rewarding for their promotion; when
the heads of research units decide which research lines to
support that enhances the chances of a better assessment
outcome and more future funding for their units, etc.
And all this is strengthened by the fast science funneling ef-
fect, where replication and reproduction of previous results
are not being produced, accepted or published in almost all
venues, not even for English.
It is as if one would have decided, in a counter-factual
world, to establish the scientiﬁc realm of Biology by re-
searching only one species, or a half dozen of them at best.
Certainly these researchers would come across many as-
pects that we would know that are common and universal
to all species and living beings, but they would have no
means to ﬁgure that out, or even to hypothesize that that
was the case given they would have no access to the other
thousands of species.

3. Monolingual cyberworld

Along human history, natural language was gone through
technological shocks, among which some of the most well
known, for instance, are the advent of writing or of the
printing press. New technologies have permitted an en-
hanced usage of languages, allowing to break temporal,
spatial and social limitations of face to face communica-
tion.
But this usually comes at the cost of a reduction in lan-
guage diversity. Languages that due to historical or eco-
nomical circumstances were not technologically prepared
or did not receive the beneﬁts of the new technology tended
to be abandoned by their speakers. A well known example
is the decline and eventual extinction of many languages
and dialects that were not used as vehicular languages by
the newspapers in previous centuries (Wright, 2016).
Leaving aside the violent cases where languages are banned
or their speakers are decimated, languages get extinct be-
cause their speakers abandon it in favor of another lan-
guage. And the causes are basically the same as the ones
that lead emigrants to abandon their rural villages to move
to big metropolis: The new language is felt to grant more
competitive advantages than the one that is getting aban-
doned, and eventually extinct, in their search for a better
life.

Natural language is undergoing a technological shock with
unprecedented historical and civilizational consequences.
Language technology will allow to overcome further lim-
itations of communication. It will allow speakers that do
not share a common language to instantly communicate
with each other, supported by automatic translation ser-
vices. And it will permit to communicate seamlessly with
all sort of devices, digital services and artiﬁcial agents in
natural language.
Even more than in previous technological shocks, language
diversity is under the risk of being drastically depleted. The
digital world is bringing new disruptive forms of living and
working with wide new competitive advantages that cannot
be ignored. Natural languages that will be technological
prepared will be major channels and instruments to get ac-
cess to those beneﬁts and will constitute a most relevant
competitive advantage. They will be an irresistible attract-
ing pole for speakers of other languages that will not un-
dergo sufﬁcient technological preparation, in yet another
instantiation of the Matthew effect of accumulated advan-
tage.
It turns out that language science and technology is neglect-
ing a vast portion of its research object, by neglecting the
research on and the technological preparation of the vast
majority of the languages. At this point, it is also evident
that this risks to contribute for the depletion of its very own
research object. The more we funnel our research into one
language, or a handful of languages, the more we are con-
tributing for the risk of others to get extinct in the digital
age, and thus for further funneling, and eventually locking,
ourselves into doing research in one language.
Under the current historical circumstances, ignoring lan-
guage diversity in our research is not only neglecting a vast
portion of our research object and delaying our scientiﬁc
progress. It is also contributing to reduce language diver-
sity and eventually compromising our chances to get to un-
derstand our very research object, human language. Given
the way we are doing language science and technology, one
could well say that we are contributing to the depletion of
our very own research object as we are investigating it. A
quite singular situation for the scientiﬁc ethos.

4. Multilingual replication
The funneling and depletion effects commented on above
can be traced back to the asymmetries underlying how
scientiﬁc activities happen to be nowadays economically
and socially sustained and deployed. These are asymme-
tries that are common to all scientiﬁc areas and disciplines
and are inducing all sorts of biases compromising not only
the effectiveness but also the integrity of the scientiﬁc en-
deavor.
This discussion has grown in importance as the resources
allocated to and societal impact of scientiﬁc activities have
been expanding (e.g. (Stodden, 2013), (Aarts and others,
2013), to the point that it has crossed the borders of the
research world and made its appearance in important mass
media and was brought to the attention of the general public
(e.g. (Nail, 2011), (Zimmer, 2012), (Begley, 2012), (Beg-
ley and Ellis, 2012), (Hiltzik, 2013), (Economist, 2013)).
The immediate motivation for this increased interest is to

141

be found in a number of factors, including the realization
that for some published results, their replication is not be-
ing obtained (e.g. Prinz et al.
(2011), Begley and Ellis
(2012)); that there may be problems with the commonly
accepted reviewing procedures, even besides their possi-
ble lack of quality, where deliberately falsiﬁed submissions,
with fabricated errors and fake authors, get accepted even
in respectable journals (e.g. Bohannon (2011)); that the ex-
pectation of researchers vis a vis misconduct, as revealed
in inquiries to scientists on questionable practices, scores
higher than one might expect or would be ready to accept
(e.g. Fanelli (2009)); among several others.
Underneath these immediate causes, a number of factors
have been pointed out, including career and promotion
pressure too biased for quantity; widespread disinterest
on negative results as an intrinsic part of the scientiﬁc
progress; widespread disfavoring of activities of replication
by funding agencies; poor or non existent retraction proce-
dures for results that are eventually noticed to be wrong or
ﬂawed after having been published; ideological pressure to
get immediate ﬁnancial return from research results; etc.
In Bill Frezza’s bold opinion, the ﬁnancial pressure on the
scientiﬁc system “has created a moral hazard to scientiﬁc
integrity no less threatening than the moral hazard to ﬁnan-
cial integrity that recently destroyed our banking system.”
(Frezza, 2011).
Given the way — together with other colleagues from other
disciplines — we are doing science and technology, one
could well say that we are contributing to the depletion of
the conditions of possibility of our very own research activ-
ity. Another quite singular situation for the scientiﬁc ethos.
Against this background, it is compelling to advocate that
like in other scientiﬁc areas, we very much need to foster
practices that enhance reproducibility and replicability of
research results and bring them to the center stage of our
scientiﬁc activities, amplifying pioneering initiatives like
the 4REAL workshop (Branco et al., 2016). Following the
text introducing a new Special Section of the Language Re-
sources and Evaluation journal on reproducibility and repli-
cability (Branco et al., 2017): “Reproduction of results en-
tails arriving at the same overall conclusion(s), as opposed
to ﬁnding identical values for some measure (Drummond,
2009), (Dalle, 2012), (Buchert and Nussbaum, 2011); that
is, to appropriately validate a set of results, scientists should
strive to reproduce the same answer to a given research
question by different means, possibly by re-implementing
an algorithm or evaluating it on a new dataset. Replication
has a somewhat more limited aim, typically involving run-
ning the exact same system under the same conditions in
order to arrive at the same output result.”
In a previous occasion, we have motivated this need on the
interest of securing the integrity and quality of the research
results in our area (Branco, 2013).
In the context of the
present paper, this need gets further reinforced as a key
measure to counteract the funneling and depletion effects
that were commented on above and that in the long run ap-
pear as self-defeating our own scientiﬁc endeavor.
It is important that results obtained when working on some
object language(s) are reproduced and replicated with those
In the
same language(s) and also with other languages.

long-term interest of our research area and research subject,
it is important that this becomes accepted and encouraged
as a ﬁrst-class citizen practice of our scientiﬁc activities.

5. Multilingual diversity
The funneling and depletion effects commented on above
can be traced back to overall asymmetries that are common
to all scientiﬁc areas and disciplines, including ours. This
calls for our community to be aligned with and be a ma-
jor contributor for global correctives initiatives, like paying
due attention to replication and reproduction of results in
scientiﬁc research.
But there are biasing effects that emerge as speciﬁc of
our area given its particular characteristics and the speciﬁc
nature of its research subject, and call for responses that
should be speciﬁc. And for a problem to be addressed and
corrected, the ﬁrst basic requirement is that there is sufﬁ-
cient awareness that it exists.
Anecdotal evidence that in language technology,1 language
diversity is obliterated and that this is not being perceived
as an issue, can be found on how titles happen to be cho-
sen for papers in international venues. The few publications
whose results are obtained working with an object language
different from English typically have an explicit mention to
that language in the title. The vast majority of the papers,
in turn, which takes English as an object language, makes
no reference to English in the title, and many times, not
even in the body of the articles. It is compelling to envis-
age this socially accommodated behavior as a manifestation
of a collective unconscious assumption — by all authors,
from both sorts of papers alike — that English is “the” nat-
ural language by default, and the other languages are just a
source of additional exotic or picturesque details.
More seriously than the inessential wording of titles, this
bias has been endured by researchers who receive reviews
for their papers whose object languages do not include En-
glish. If one pays attention to their shared stories during
coffee breaks in conferences, one come to realize that more
often than not they are questioned by anonymous review-
ers whether their results also hold for English (but not,
say, for Finnish, Farsi, Hindi, Japanese or any other one
of 7 000 languages in the world), or even advised that En-
glish should be tried for the paper to be considered mature
to be submitted for publication.
Anecdotal aspects aside, the bias this is illustrating has a
decisive impact on how our research activities are fostered
and our results have been pursued.
In this extended ab-
stract, we will focus on one particular example, meant to
be illustrative.
As a language resource, WorddNet is a most well known
and important asset in language technology. As a multi-
party open research initiative, it is a most successful one in
our area. And as a case of replication, it is a most prominent
one, with an ever growing number of WordNets in construc-
tion for particular languages. This is why WorNet offers
a telling example that diversity is needed and can be pro-
moted.

1With honorable exceptions, like the research communities
gathering around LREC/ELRA conferences and only a very few
others.

142

There have been a number of initiatives, including Eu-
roWordNet, MultiWordNet, BalkaNet, etc. (Vossen, 1998),
(Pianta et al., 2002), (Tuﬁs¸ et al., 2000), where concepts
that are from different WordNets and are semantically
equivalent are co-indexed with each other. As semantic
equivalence is a transitive relation, it sufﬁces that each con-
cept, in a particular language/WordNet, is indexed with an
equivalent concept, in any other language/WordNet. How-
ever, in practice concepts from all languages other than En-
glish have been connected to concepts of only one other
language, namely English. In practice, no sustained stud-
ies, development tools or alternative multilingual ensem-
bles that support a different approach have been pursued.
When there are two equivalent concepts that can be lexi-
cally expressed in two languages other than English, but
that cannot expressed in English, that equivalence has re-
mained unrecorded. This has funneling effects that once
again brings superior development effort and competitive
advantage to English. The WordNet for this language has
the widest translational homomorphism, built though at the
cost of a signiﬁcant share of the resources deployed for
and during the construction of the WordNets for the other
the languages. And at the cost that translational equiva-
lence is eventually sub-optimally registered among other
languages.
More recently, this funneling effect had been further fos-
tered as a side effect of other initiatives, including Open
Multilingual WordNet, BabelNet, etc.
(Bond and Paik,
2012),
(Navigli and Ponzetto, 2012), whose goal is to
gather ensembles of WordNets mapped among themselves,
rather than just co-indexing their concepts. As these ensem-
bles start being increasingly used and cited in the literature,
the existence of the individual WordNets gets obfuscated.
Given these ensembles appear as a convenient one-stop ref-
erence, even when only one particular WordNet in them is
needed, the former are the favored reference. Citations to
individual WordNets are thus vanishing, and with them the
incentives and the research productivity indicators that re-
searchers and funding entities need in order to support the
continued research on other languages/WordNets.
As a ﬁrst possible step contributing towards mitigating
these funneling effects, we have proposed the undertaking
of a Pluricentric Global Wordnet (Branco et al., 2018). But
our goal here is not to motivate and present this notion.
Rather, WordNet is being offered just as one illustrative
case — among possibly many existing ones — of asym-
metric biases that may be speciﬁc to our ﬁeld, and to each
one of our research topics, and that need to be addressed
with speciﬁc responses that go on a par with an increased
attention to reproduction and replication of results.
Such speciﬁc responses are needed to secure and enhance
diversity in a wide range of dimensions in our research ac-
tivities. We need more language diversity in every aspect of
our procedures in our scientiﬁc activity, ranging from how
we set up the reviewing of papers in conferences, to how
we conceive our research questions and deploy our priori-
ties around every one of our research topics or subareas, and
including crucially how we raise and lobby for the funding
of our activities.
Certainly, the need for more language diversity echoes,

even if at a different level, the overall need for more diver-
sity in our area, including the diversity in terms of method-
ological approaches, gender, etc., that have also started to
be identiﬁed at other venues (Nivre, 2017).

6. Final remarks
In this paper, we presented an analysis aimed at bringing to
light two processes that are induced by our research activi-
ties in language technology and whose combination are one
of the major contributions for the depletion of language di-
versity. One the one hand, our research focus mostly in
one language, English. On the other hand, natural lan-
guage is undergoing a historical technological shock that
is reducing the social and economical competitive advan-
tages for the vast majority of individual languages other
than English. Each one of these processes is an instance
of and is propelling a powerful Mathew effect of accumu-
lated advantage, which get even further aggravated by the
compounding effect of their conﬂuence and the exponential
magnifying combination with each other.
Besides raising awareness about this circumstance as a ma-
jor issue questioning our practice as scientists, in this paper,
we also propose measures to mitigate and counteract this
unwelcome contribution of language technology for the de-
pletion of its own research subject.
A set of measures results from the alignment with an
emerging global trend in science that is urging for greatly
increasing the replication and reproduction of research re-
sults, for the sake of securing the overall credibility of the
scientiﬁc knowledge and endeavor. Language technology
also needs and beneﬁts from aligning as most and as rapidly
as possible with this trend. This process needs and should
— and provides a major opportunity — to extend replica-
tion and reproduction to languages other than English.
Another set of measures are speciﬁc to our area and result
from bringing to light and counteracting the non assumed
viewpoint that English is the natural language by default.
We need more language diversity in our scientiﬁc proce-
dures. This should trigger an overall collective process of
renewing our activities, ranging from how we set up the
reviewing of submitted papers in conferences, to how we
conceive our research questions and deploy our priorities
around every one of our research topics or subareas, and
including crucially how we lobby for the external support
to our activities.

Acknowledgment
The present research was partly supported by the In-
frastructure for the Science and Technology of the Por-
tuguese Language (CLARIN L´ıngua Portuguesa), and by
the ANI/3279/2016 grant.

7. References
Aarts, A. et al. (2013). Estimating the reproducibility of

psychological science. Science, 349.

Begley, G. and Ellis, L.

(2012). Drug development:
Raise standards for preclinical cancer research. Nature,
483:531–533.

Begley, S. (2012). In cancer science, many ”discoveries”
don’t hold up. March 28, 2012, online edition. Reuters.

143

Christopher Moseley, editor. (2010). Atlas of the World’s
Languages in Danger. UNESCO Publishing, third edi-
tion.
Nail, G.

Re-
Street
producing
Journal, December
edition.
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052970
20376480457705 9841672541590.

Scientists’ elusive goal:
results.
2,

(2011).
study

The Wall

online

2011,

Navigli, R. and Ponzetto, S. P. (2012). BabelNet: The
automatic construction, evaluation and application of a
wide-coverage multilingual semantic network. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 193:217–250.

Nivre, J. (2017). Presidential address ACL 2017: Chal-
the
lenges for ACL. The 55th Annual Meeting of
Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL).
https://pt.slideshare.net/aclanthology/joakim-nivre-
2017-presidential-address-acl-2017-challenges-for-acl.
Pianta, E., Bentivogli, L., and Girardi, C. (2002). Multi-
wordnet: Developing an aligned multilingual database.
In Proceedings of the First International Conference on
Global WordNet.

Prinz, F., Schlange, T., and Asadullah, K. (2011). Believe
it or not: how much can we rely on published data on
potential drug targets? Nature Reviews Drug Discovery,
10:712.

Georg Rehm et al., editors. (2013). META-NET Strate-
gic Research Agenda for Multilingual Europe 2020.
Springer.
Stodden, V.

(2013).
and
of Mathematical

irreproducibility
In-
research.
Statistics Bulletin On-
http://bulletin.imstat.org/2013/11/resolving-

in
stitute
line.
irreproducibility-in-empirical-and-computational-
research.

Resolving
computational

empirical

Tuﬁs¸, D., Cristea, D., and Stamou, S.

(2000). Balka-
net: Aims, methods, results and perspectives - a general
overview. Romanian Journal of Information Science and
Technology Special Issue, 7:9–42.

Vossen, P. (1998). EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Database

with Lexical Semantic Networks. Kluwer.

Wright, S. (2016). Language Policy and Language Plan-
ning: From Nationalism to Globalisation. Palgrave
Macmillan UK, second edition.

Zimmer, C.

(2012).
calls

A sharp
for

rise

reform.

tions
prompts
York Times, April
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/17/science/rise-
in-scientiﬁc-journal-retractions-prompts-calls-for-
reform.html.

online

2012,

16,

in
retrac-
The New
edition.

Bohannon, J. (2011). Who’s afraid of peer review? Sci-

ence, 341:60–65.

Bond, F. and Paik, K. (2012). A survey of wordnets and
their licenses. In Proceedings of the 6th Global WordNet
Conference (GWC 2012), pages 64–71.

Ant´onio Branco, et al., editors. (2016). Proceedings of the
Workshop on Research Results Reproducibility and Re-
sources Citation in Science and Technology of Language
(4REAL), of LREC2016. ELRA.

Branco, A., Cohen, K. B., Vossen, P., Ide, N., and Calzolari,
N. (2017). Replicability and reproducibility of research
results for human language technology: Introducing an
lre special section. Language Resources and Evaluation,
51:1–5.

Branco, A., Branco, R., Saedi, C., and Silva, J. (2018).
Browsing and supporting pluricentric global wordnet, or
just your wordnet of interest. In Proceedings of LREC
2018.

Branco, A. (2013). Reliability and meta-reliability of lan-
guage resources: Ready to initiate the integrity debate?
In Sandra Kuebler, et al., editors, Proceedings of the
12th Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories
(TLT12), pages 27–36. Bulgarian Academy of Sciences.
Buchert, T. and Nussbaum, L. (2011). Leveraging busi-
ness workﬂows in distributed systems research for the or-
chestration of reproducible and scalable experiments. In
Anne Etien, editor, 9`eme ´edition de la conf´erence MAn-
ifestation des JEunes Chercheurs en Sciences et Tech-
nologies de l’Information et de la Communication - Ma-
jecSTIC 2012 (2012).

Dalle, O. (2012). On reproducibility and traceability of
simulations. In Proceedings of the 2012 Winter Simu-
lation Conference (WSC), pages 1–12. IEE.

Drummond, C. (2009). Replicability is not reproducibil-
ity: nor is it good science. In Proceedings of the Eval-
uation Methods for Machine Learning Workshop at the
26th ICML.

Economist. (2013). Unreliable research: Trouble at the
lab. The Economist, October 19, 2013, online edition.
http://www.economist.com/news/brieﬁng/21588057-
scientists-think-science-self-correcting-alarming-
degree-it-not-trouble.
(2009).

How many scientists

Fanelli, D.

fabri-
a systematic review
PLOS ONE.

survey data.

cate and falsify research?
and meta-analysis of
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0005738.
(2011).
scientiﬁc
December

The ﬁnancially driven ero-
Real Clear Mar-
edition.

sion
kets,
http://www.realclearmarkets.com/articles/2011/12/05/the-
ﬁnancially-driven-erosion-of-scientiﬁc-integrity-
99401.html.

integrity.
5,

Frezza, B.
of

online

3011,

Hiltzik, M.

(2013). Science has lost its way, at a big
cost to humanity. Los Angeles Times, October 17, 2013,
online edition. http://www.latimes.com/business/la-ﬁ-
hiltzik-20131027,0,1228881.column#ixzz2lT8zjZWD.
Mariani, J. and Frankopoulo, G. (2012). Language matri-
ces and the language resource impact factor. In PAROLE
Workshop, Lisbon, 18-19 October 2012.

144

Figure 1: Number of references to data sets and processing tools per language at top scientiﬁc conferences between 2010
and in 2012, from (Mariani and Frankopoulo, 2012).

145

