Fake News Detection on Social Media:
A Data Mining Perspective

Kai Shu†, Amy Sliva‡, Suhang Wang†, Jiliang Tang (cid:92), and Huan Liu†
†Computer Science & Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
‡Charles River Analytics, Cambridge, MA, USA
(cid:92)Computer Science & Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
†{kai.shu,suhang.wang,huan.liu}@asu.edu,
‡asliva@cra.com, (cid:92) tangjili@msu.edu

7
1
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
 
 
]
I
S
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
7
6
9
1
0
.
8
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Social media for news consumption is a double-edged sword.
On the one hand, its low cost, easy access, and rapid dissem-
ination of information lead people to seek out and consume
news from social media. On the other hand, it enables the
wide spread of “fake news”, i.e., low quality news with in-
tentionally false information. The extensive spread of fake
news has the potential for extremely negative impacts on
individuals and society. Therefore, fake news detection on
social media has recently become an emerging research that
is attracting tremendous attention. Fake news detection
on social media presents unique characteristics and chal-
lenges that make existing detection algorithms from tradi-
tional news media ineﬀective or not applicable. First, fake
news is intentionally written to mislead readers to believe
false information, which makes it diﬃcult and nontrivial to
detect based on news content; therefore, we need to include
auxiliary information, such as user social engagements on
social media, to help make a determination. Second, ex-
ploiting this auxiliary information is challenging in and of
itself as users’ social engagements with fake news produce
data that is big, incomplete, unstructured, and noisy. Be-
cause the issue of fake news detection on social media is both
challenging and relevant, we conducted this survey to fur-
ther facilitate research on the problem. In this survey, we
present a comprehensive review of detecting fake news on
social media, including fake news characterizations on psy-
chology and social theories, existing algorithms from a data
mining perspective, evaluation metrics and representative
datasets. We also discuss related research areas, open prob-
lems, and future research directions for fake news detection
on social media.

INTRODUCTION

1.
As an increasing amount of our lives is spent interacting
online through social media platforms, more and more peo-
ple tend to seek out and consume news from social media
rather than traditional news organizations. The reasons for
this change in consumption behaviors are inherent in the
nature of these social media platforms: (i) it is often more
timely and less expensive to consume news on social media
compared with traditional news media, such as newspapers
or television; and (ii) it is easier to further share, comment

on, and discuss the news with friends or other readers on
social media. For example, 62 percent of U.S. adults get
news on social media in 2016, while in 2012, only 49 per-
cent reported seeing news on social media1.
It was also
found that social media now outperforms television as the
major news source2. Despite the advantages provided by
social media, the quality of news on social media is lower
than traditional news organizations. However, because it
is cheap to provide news online and much faster and easier
to disseminate through social media, large volumes of fake
news, i.e., those news articles with intentionally false infor-
mation, are produced online for a variety of purposes, such
as ﬁnancial and political gain. It was estimated that over 1
million tweets are related to fake news “Pizzagate”3 by the
end of the presidential election. Given the prevalence of this
new phenomenon, “Fake news” was even named the word of
the year by the Macquarie dictionary in 2016.
The extensive spread of fake news can have a serious nega-
tive impact on individuals and society. First, fake news can
break the authenticity balance of the news ecosystem. For
example, it is evident that the most popular fake news was
even more widely spread on Facebook than the most pop-
ular authentic mainstream news during the U.S. 2016 pres-
ident election4. Second, fake news intentionally persuades
consumers to accept biased or false beliefs. Fake news is
usually manipulated by propagandists to convey political
messages or inﬂuence. For example, some report shows that
Russia has created fake accounts and social bots to spread
false stories5. Third, fake news changes the way people in-
terpret and respond to real news. For example, some fake
news was just created to trigger people’s distrust and make
them confused, impeding their abilities to diﬀerentiate what
is true from what is not6. To help mitigate the negative ef-
fects caused by fake news–both to beneﬁt the public and
the news ecosystem–It’s critical that we develop methods to
automatically detect fake news on social media.

1http://www.journalism.org/2016/05/26/news-use-across-
social-media-platforms-2016/
2http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-36528256
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pizzagate conspiracy theory
4https://www.buzzfeed.com/craigsilverman/viral-
fake-election-news-outperformed-real-news-on-
facebook?utm term=.nrg0WA1VP0#.gjJyKapW5y
5http://time.com/4783932/inside-russia-social-media-war-
america/
6https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/28/opinion/fake-
news-and-the-internet-shell-game.html? r=0

Detecting fake news on social media poses several new and
challenging research problems. Though fake news itself is
not a new problem–nations or groups have been using the
news media to execute propaganda or inﬂuence operations
for centuries–the rise of web-generated news on social me-
dia makes fake news a more powerful force that challenges
traditional journalistic norms. There are several character-
istics of this problem that make it uniquely challenging for
automated detection. First, fake news is intentionally writ-
ten to mislead readers, which makes it nontrivial to detect
simply based on news content. The content of fake news is
rather diverse in terms of topics, styles and media platforms,
and fake news attempts to distort truth with diverse lin-
guistic styles while simultaneously mocking true news. For
example, fake news may cite true evidence within the in-
correct context to support a non-factual claim [22]. Thus,
existing hand-crafted and data-speciﬁc textual features are
generally not suﬃcient for fake news detection. Other aux-
iliary information must also be applied to improve detec-
tion, such as knowledge base and user social engagements.
Second, exploiting this auxiliary information actually leads
to another critical challenge: the quality of the data itself.
Fake news is usually related to newly emerging, time-critical
events, which may not have been properly veriﬁed by exist-
ing knowledge bases due to the lack of corroborating ev-
idence or claims.
In addition, users’ social engagements
with fake news produce data that is big, incomplete, un-
structured, and noisy [79]. Eﬀective methods to diﬀerenti-
ate credible users, extract useful post features and exploit
network interactions are an open area of research and need
further investigations.
In this article, we present an overview of fake news detection
and discuss promising research directions. The key motiva-
tions of this survey are summarized as follows:

• Fake news on social media has been occurring for sev-
eral years; however, there is no agreed upon deﬁnition
of the term “fake news”. To better guide the future
directions of fake news detection research, appropriate
clariﬁcations are necessary.

• Social media has proved to be a powerful source for
fake news dissemination. There are some emerging
patterns that can be utilized for fake news detection
in social media. A review on existing fake news detec-
tion methods under various social media scenarios can
provide a basic understanding on the state-of-the-art
fake news detection methods.

• Fake news detection on social media is still in the early
age of development, and there are still many challeng-
ing issues that need further investigations. It is neces-
sary to discuss potential research directions that can
improve fake news detection and mitigation capabili-
ties.

To facilitate research in fake news detection on social me-
dia, in this survey we will review two aspects of the fake
news detection problem: characterization and detection. As
shown in Figure 1, we will ﬁrst describe the background of
the fake news detection problem using theories and prop-
erties from psychology and social studies; then we present
the detection approaches. Our major contributions of this
survey are summarized as follows:

• We discuss the narrow and broad deﬁnitions of fake
news that cover most existing deﬁnitions in the litera-
ture and further present the unique characteristics of
fake news on social media and its implications com-
pared with the traditional media;

• We give an overview of existing fake news detection
methods with a principled way to group representative
methods into diﬀerent categories; and

• We discuss several open issues and provide future di-

rections of fake news detection in social media.

The remainder of this survey is organized as follows.
In
Section 2, we present the deﬁnition of fake news and char-
acterize it by comparing diﬀerent theories and properties in
both traditional and social media. In Section 3, we continue
to formally deﬁne the fake news detection problem and sum-
marize the methods to detect fake news. In Section 4, we
discuss the datasets and evaluation metrics used by existing
methods. We brieﬂy introduce areas related to fake news de-
tection on social media in Section 5. Finally, we discuss the
open issues and future directions in Section 6 and conclude
this survey in Section 7.

2. FAKE NEWS CHARACTERIZATION
In this section, we introduce the basic social and psychologi-
cal theories related to fake news and discuss more advanced
patterns introduced by social media. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
discuss various deﬁnitions of fake news and diﬀerentiate re-
lated concepts that are usually misunderstood as fake news.
We then describe diﬀerent aspects of fake news on tradi-
tional media and the new patterns found on social media.

2.1 Deﬁnitions of Fake News
Fake news has existed for a very long time, nearly the same
amount of time as news began to circulate widely after the
printing press was invented in 14397. However, there is no
agreed deﬁnition of the term “fake news”. Therefore, we ﬁrst
discuss and compare some widely used deﬁnitions of fake
news in the existing literature, and provide our deﬁnition of
fake news that will be used for the remainder of this survey.
A narrow deﬁnition of fake news is news articles that are in-
tentionally and veriﬁably false and could mislead readers [2].
There are two key features of this deﬁnition: authenticity
and intent. First, fake news includes false information that
can be veriﬁed as such. Second, fake news is created with
dishonest intention to mislead consumers. This deﬁnition
has been widely adopted in recent studies [57; 17; 62; 41].
Broader deﬁnitions of fake news focus on the either authen-
ticity or intent of the news content. Some papers regard
satire news as fake news since the contents are false even
though satire is often entertainment-oriented and reveals its
own deceptiveness to the consumers [67; 4; 37; 9]. Other
literature directly treats deceptive news as fake news [66],
which includes serious fabrications, hoaxes, and satires.
In this article, we use the narrow deﬁnition of fake news.
Formally, we state this deﬁnition as follows,

Definition 1 (Fake News) Fake news is a news article
that is intentionally and veriﬁably false.

7http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/12/fake-
news-history-long-violent-214535

Figure 1: Fake news on social media: from characterization to detection.

The reasons for choosing this narrow deﬁnition are three-
folds. First, the underlying intent of fake news provides both
theoretical and practical value that enables a deeper under-
standing and analysis of this topic. Second, any techniques
for truth veriﬁcation that apply to the narrow conception
of fake news can also be applied to under the broader deﬁ-
nition. Third, this deﬁnition is able to eliminate the ambi-
guities between fake news and related concepts that are not
considered in this article. The following concepts are not
fake news according to our deﬁnition: (1) satire news with
proper context, which has no intent to mislead or deceive
consumers and is unlikely to be mis-perceived as factual;
(2) rumors that did not originate from news events; (3) con-
spiracy theories, which are diﬃcult verify as true or false;
(4) misinformation that is created unintentionally; and (5)
hoaxes that are only motivated by fun or to scam targeted
individuals.

2.2 Fake News on Traditional News Media
Fake news itself is not a new problem. The media ecology
of fake news has been changing over time from newsprint to
radio/television and, recently, online news and social media.
We denote “traditional fake news” as the fake news problem
before social media had important eﬀects on its production
and dissemination. Next, we will describe several psycholog-
ical and social science foundations that describe the impact
of fake news at both the individual and social information
ecosystem levels.

Psychological Foundations of Fake News. Humans are
naturally not very good at diﬀerentiating between real and
fake news. There are several psychological and cognitive
theories that can explain this phenomenon and the inﬂuen-
tial power of fake news. Traditional fake news mainly tar-
gets consumers by exploiting their individual vulnerabilities.
There are two major factors which make consumers natu-
rally vulnerable to fake news: (i) Na¨ıve Realism: consumers
tend to believe that their perceptions of reality are the only
accurate views, while others who disagree are regarded as
uninformed, irrational, or biased [92]; and (ii) Conﬁrmation
Bias: consumers prefer to receive information that conﬁrms
their existing views [58]. Due to these cognitive biases inher-
ent in human nature, fake news can often be perceived as real
by consumers. Moreover, once the misperception is formed,
it is very hard to correct it. Psychology studies shows that
correction of false information (e.g., fake news) by the pre-
sentation of true, factual information is not only unhelpful

to reduce misperceptions, but sometimes may even increase
the misperceptions, especially among ideological groups [59].

Social Foundations of the Fake News Ecosystem.
Considering the entire news consumption ecosystem, we can
also describe some of the social dynamics that contribute to
the proliferation of fake news. Prospect theory describes
decision making as a process by which people make choices
based on the relative gains and losses as compared to their
current state [39; 81]. This desire for maximizing the reward
of a decision applies to social gains as well, for instance,
continued acceptance by others in a user’s immediate social
network. As described by social identity theory [76; 77] and
normative inﬂuence theory [3; 40], this preference for social
acceptance and aﬃrmation is essential to a person’s identity
and self-esteem, making users likely to choose “socially safe”
options when consuming and disseminating news informa-
tion, following the norms established in the community even
if the news being shared is fake news.
This rational theory of fake news interactions can be mod-
eled from an economic game theoretical perspective [26] by
formulating the news generation and consumption cycle as a
two-player strategy game. For explaining fake news, we as-
sume there are two kinds of key players in the information
ecosystem: publisher and consumer. The process of news
publishing is modeled as a mapping from original signal s
to resultant news report a with an eﬀect of distortion bias
b, i.e., s b−→ a, where b = [−1, 0, 1] indicates [lef t, no, right]
biases take eﬀects on news publishing process. Intuitively,
this is capturing the degree to which a news article may be
biased or distorted to produce fake news. The utility for
the publisher stems from two perspectives: (i) short-term
utility: the incentive to maximize proﬁt, which is positively
correlated with the number of consumers reached; (ii) long-
term utility: their reputation in terms of news authenticity.
Utility of consumers consists of two parts: (i) information
utility: obtaining true and unbiased information (usually ex-
tra investment cost needed); (ii) psychology utility: receiving
news that satisﬁes their prior opinions and social needs, e.g.,
conﬁrmation bias and prospect theory. Both publisher and
consumer try to maximize their overall utilities in this strat-
egy game of the news consumption process. We can capture
the fact that fake news happens when the short-term utility
dominates a publisher’s overall utility and psychology utility
dominates the consumer’s overall utility, and an equilibrium
is maintained. This explains the social dynamics that lead
to an information ecosystem where fake news can thrive.

2.3 Fake News on Social Media
In this subsection, we will discuss some unique character-
istics of fake news on social media. Speciﬁcally, we will
highlight the key features of fake news that are enabled by
social media. Note that the aforementioned characteristics
of traditional fake news are also applicable to social media.

Malicious Accounts on Social Media for Propaganda.
While many users on social media are legitimate, social me-
dia users may also be malicious, and in some cases are not
even real humans. The low cost of creating social media
accounts also encourages malicious user accounts, such as
social bots, cyborg users, and trolls. A social bot refers to
a social media account that is controlled by a computer al-
gorithm to automatically produce content and interact with
humans (or other bot users) on social media [23]. Social bots
can become malicious entities designed speciﬁcally with the
purpose to do harm, such as manipulating and spreading
fake news on social media. Studies shows that social bots
distorted the 2016 U.S. presidential election online discus-
sions on a large scale [6], and that around 19 million bot
accounts tweeted in support of either Trump or Clinton in
the week leading up to election day8. Trolls, real human
users who aim to disrupt online communities and provoke
consumers into an emotional response, are also playing an
important role in spreading fake news on social media. For
example, evidence suggests that there were 1,000 paid Rus-
sian trolls spreading fake news on Hillary Clinton9. Trolling
behaviors are highly aﬀected by people’s mood and the con-
text of online discussions, which enables the easy dissemi-
nation of fake news among otherwise “normal” online com-
munities [14]. The eﬀect of trolling is to trigger people’s
inner negative emotions, such as anger and fear, resulting
in doubt, distrust, and irrational behavior. Finally, cyborg
users can spread fake news in a way that blends automated
activities with human input. Usually cyborg accounts are
registered by human as a camouﬂage and set automated pro-
grams to perform activities in social media. The easy switch
of functionalities between human and bot oﬀers cyborg users
unique opportunities to spread fake news [15]. In a nutshell,
these highly active and partisan malicious accounts on so-
cial media become the powerful sources and proliferation of
fake news.

Echo Chamber Eﬀect. Social media provides a new paradigm
of information creation and consumption for users. The
information seeking and consumption process are chang-
ing from a mediated form (e.g., by journalists) to a more
disinter-mediated way [19]. Consumers are selectively ex-
posed to certain kinds of news because of the way news
feed appear on their homepage in social media, amplifying
the psychological challenges to dispelling fake news identi-
ﬁed above. For example, users on Facebook always follow
like-minded people and thus receive news that promote their
favored existing narratives [65]. Therefore, users on social
media tend to form groups containing like-minded people
where they then polarize their opinions, resulting in an echo
chamber eﬀect. The echo chamber eﬀect facilitates the pro-

8http://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/2016/11/18/resource-for-
understanding-political-bots/
9http://www.huﬃngtonpost.com/entry/russian-trolls-fake-
news us 58dde6bae4b08194e3b8d5c4

cess by which people consume and believe fake news due to
the following psychological factors [60]: (1) social credibility,
which means people are more likely to perceive a source as
credible if others perceive the source is credible, especially
when there is not enough information available to access the
truthfulness of the source; and (2) frequency heuristic, which
means that consumers may naturally favor information they
hear frequently, even if it is fake news. Studies have shown
that increased exposure to an idea is enough to generate a
positive opinion of it [100; 101], and in echo chambers, users
continue to share and consume the same information. As a
result, this echo chamber eﬀect creates segmented, homoge-
neous communities with a very limited information ecosys-
tem. Research shows that the homogeneous communities
become the primary driver of information diﬀusion that fur-
ther strengthens polarization [18].

3. FAKE NEWS DETECTION
In the previous section, we introduced the conceptual char-
acterization of traditional fake news and fake news in so-
cial media. Based on this characterization, we further ex-
plore the problem deﬁnition and proposed approaches for
fake news detection.

3.1 Problem Deﬁnition
In this subsection, we present the details of mathematical
formulation of fake news detection on social media. Specif-
ically, we will introduce the deﬁnition of key components
of fake news and then present the formal deﬁnition of fake
news detection. The basic notations are deﬁned below,

• Let a refer to a News Article. It consists of two ma-
jor components: Publisher and Content. Publisher (cid:126)pa
includes a set of proﬁle features to describe the origi-
nal author, such as name, domain, age, among other
attributes. Content (cid:126)ca consists of a set of attributes
that represent the news article and includes headline,
text, image, etc.

• We also deﬁne Social News Engagements as a set of
tuples E = {eit} to represent the process of how news
spread over time among n users U = {u1, u2, ..., un}
and their corresponding posts P = {p1, p2, ..., pn} on
social media regarding news article a. Each engage-
ment eit = {ui, pi, t} represents that a user ui spreads
news article a using pi at time t. Note that we set
t = N ull if the article a does not have any engage-
ment yet and thus ui represents the publisher.

Definition 2 (Fake News Detection) Given the social
news engagements E among n users for news article a, the
task of fake news detection is to predict whether the news
article a is a fake news piece or not, i.e., F : E → {0, 1}
such that,

F(a) =

(cid:40)

1,
0, otherwise.

if a is a piece of fake news,

(1)

where F is the prediction function we want to learn.
Note that we deﬁne fake news detection as a binary classiﬁ-
cation problem for the following reason: fake news is essen-
tially a distortion bias on information manipulated by the
publisher. According to previous research about media bias

theory [26], distortion bias is usually modeled as a binary
classiﬁcation problem.
Next, we propose a general data mining framework for fake
news detection which includes two phases: (i) feature ex-
traction and (ii) model construction. The feature extraction
phase aims to represent news content and related auxiliary
information in a formal mathematical structure, and model
construction phase further builds machine learning models
to better diﬀerentiate fake news and real news based on the
feature representations.

3.2 Feature Extraction
Fake news detection on traditional news media mainly relies
on news content, while in social media, extra social context
auxiliary information can be used to as additional informa-
tion to help detect fake news. Thus, we will present the
details of how to extract and represent useful features from
news content and social context.

3.2.1 News Content Features
News content features (cid:126)ca describe the meta information re-
lated to a piece of news. A list of representative news content
attributes are listed below:

• Source: Author or publisher of the news article

• Headline: Short title text that aims to catch the at-
tention of readers and describes the main topic of the
article

• Body Text: Main text that elaborates the details of
the news story; there is usually a major claim that is
speciﬁcally highlighted and that shapes the angle of
the publisher

• Image/Video: Part of the body content of a news
article that provides visual cues to frame the story

Based on these raw content attributes, diﬀerent kinds of
feature representations can be built to extract discriminative
characteristics of fake news. Typically, the news content we
are looking at will mostly be linguistic-based and visual-
based, described in more detail below.

Linguistic-based: Since fake news pieces are intention-
ally created for ﬁnancial or political gain rather than to re-
port objective claims, they often contain opinionated and
inﬂammatory language, crafted as “clickbait” (i.e., to en-
tice users to click on the link to read the full article) or
to incite confusion [13]. Thus, it is reasonable to exploit
linguistic features that capture the diﬀerent writing styles
and sensational headlines to detect fake news. Linguistic-
based features are extracted from the text content in terms
of document organizations from diﬀerent levels, such as char-
acters, words, sentences, and documents. In order to cap-
ture the diﬀerent aspects of fake news and real news, ex-
isting work utilized both common linguistic features and
domain-speciﬁc linguistic features. Common linguistic fea-
tures are often used to represent documents for various tasks
in natural language processing. Typical common linguis-
including character-
tic features are:
level and word-level features, such as total words, charac-
ters per word, frequency of large words, and unique words;
(ii) syntactic features, including sentence-level features, such

(i) lexical features,

as frequency of function words and phrases (i.e., “n-grams”
and bag-of-words approaches [24]) or punctuation and parts-
of-speech (POS) tagging. Domain-speciﬁc linguistic fea-
tures, which are speciﬁcally aligned to news domain, such
as quoted words, external links, number of graphs, and the
average length of graphs, etc [62]. Moreover, other features
can be speciﬁcally designed to capture the deceptive cues
in writing styles to diﬀerentiate fake news, such as lying-
detection features [1].

Visual-based: Visual cues have been shown to be an im-
portant manipulator for fake news propaganda10. As we
have characterized, fake news exploits the individual vulner-
abilities of people and thus often relies on sensational or even
fake images to provoke anger or other emotional response of
consumers. Visual-based features are extracted from visual
images and videos) to capture the diﬀerent
elements (e.g.
characteristics for fake news. Faking images were identiﬁed
based on various user-level and tweet-level hand-crafted fea-
tures using classiﬁcation framework [28]. Recently, various
visual and statistical features has been extracted for news
veriﬁcation [38]. Visual features include clarity score, coher-
ence score, similarity distribution histogram, diversity score,
and clustering score. Statistical features include count, im-
age ratio, multi-image ratio, hot image ratio, long image
ratio, etc.

Social Context Features

3.2.2
In addition to features related directly to the content of
the news articles, additional social context features can also
be derived from the user-driven social engagements of news
consumption on social media platform. Social engagements
represent the news proliferation process over time, which
provides useful auxiliary information to infer the veracity of
news articles. Note that few papers exist in the literature
that detect fake news using social context features. How-
ever, because we believe this is a critical aspect of successful
fake news detection, we introduce a set of common features
utilized in similar research areas, such as rumor veracity
classiﬁcation on social media. Generally, there are three
major aspects of the social media context that we want to
represent: users, generated posts, and networks. Below, we
investigate how we can extract and represent social context
features from these three aspects to support fake news de-
tection.

User-based: As we mentioned in Section 2.3, fake news
pieces are likely to be created and spread by non-human
accounts, such as social bots or cyborgs. Thus, capturing
users’ proﬁles and characteristics by user-based features can
provide useful information for fake news detection. User-
based features represent the characteristics of those users
who have interactions with the news on social media. These
features can be categorized across diﬀerent levels: individual
level and group level. Individual level features are extracted
to infer the credibility and reliability for each user using
various aspects of user demographics, such as registration
age, number of followers/followees, number of tweets the
user has authored, etc [11]. Group level user features cap-
ture overall characteristics of groups of users related to the
news [99]. The assumption is that the spreaders of fake news

10https://www.wired.com/2016/12/photos-fuel-spread-fake-
news/

and real news may form diﬀerent communities with unique
characteristics that can be depicted by group level features.
Commonly used group level features come from aggregat-
ing (e.g., averaging and weighting) individual level features,
such as ‘percentage of veriﬁed users’ and ‘average number
of followers’ [49; 42].

are properly built, existing network metrics can be applied
as feature representations. For example, degree and cluster-
ing coeﬃcient have been used to characterize the diﬀusion
network [42] and friendship network [42]. Other approaches
learn the latent node embedding features by using SVD [69]
or network propagation algorithms [37].

Post-based: People express their emotions or opinions to-
wards fake news through social media posts, such as skep-
tical opinions, sensational reactions, etc. Thus, it is rea-
sonable to extract post-based features to help ﬁnd potential
fake news via reactions from the general public as expressed
in posts. Post-based features focus on identifying useful in-
formation to infer the veracity of news from various aspects
of relevant social media posts. These features can be cat-
egorized as post level, group level, and temporal level. Post
level features generate feature values for each post. The
aforementioned linguistic-based features and some embed-
ding approaches [69] for news content can also be applied
for each post. Speciﬁcally, there are unique features for
posts that represent the social response from general pub-
lic, such as stance, topic, and credibility. Stance features (or
viewpoints) indicate the users’ opinions towards the news,
such as supporting, denying, etc [37]. Topic features can be
extracted using topic models, such as latent Dirichlet allo-
cation (LDA) [49]. Credibility features for posts assess the
degree of reliability [11]. Group level features aim to ag-
gregate the feature values for all relevant posts for speciﬁc
news articles by using “wisdom of crowds”. For example,
the average credibility scores are used to evaluate the credi-
bility of news [37]. A more comprehensive list of group-level
post features can also be found in [11]. Temporal level fea-
tures consider the temporal variations of post level feature
values [49]. Unsupervised embedding methods, such as re-
current neural network (RNN), are utilized to capture the
changes in posts over time [69; 48]. Based on the shape of
this time series for various metrics of relevant posts (e.g,
number of posts), mathematical features can be computed,
such as SpikeM parameters [42].

Network-based: Users form diﬀerent networks on social
media in terms of interests, topics, and relations. As men-
tioned before, fake news dissemination processes tend to
form an echo chamber cycle, highlighting the value of ex-
tracting network-based features to represent these types of
network patterns for fake news detection. Network-based
features are extracted via constructing speciﬁc networks among
the users who published related social media posts. Diﬀerent
types of networks can be constructed. The stance network
can be built with nodes indicating all the tweets relevant
to the news and the edge indicating the weights of similar-
ity of stances [37; 75]. Another type of network is the co-
occurrence network, which is built based on the user engage-
ments by counting whether those users write posts relevant
to the same news articles [69]. In addition, the friendship
network indicates the following/followee structure of users
who post related tweets [42]. An extension of this friendship
network is the diﬀusion network, which tracks the trajectory
of the spread of news [42], where nodes represent the users
and edges represent the information diﬀusion paths among
them. That is, a diﬀusion path between two users ui and uj
exists if and only if (1) uj follows ui, and (2) uj posts about
a given news only after ui does so. After these networks

3.3 Model Construction
In the previous section, we introduced features extracted
from diﬀerent sources, i.e., news content and social con-
text, for fake news detection. In this section, we discuss the
details of the model construction process for several exist-
ing approaches. Speciﬁcally we categorize existing methods
based on their main input sources as: News Content Models
and Social Context Models.

3.3.1 News Content Models
In this subsection, we focus on news content models, which
mainly rely on news content features and existing factual
sources to classify fake news. Speciﬁcally, existing approaches
can be categorized as Knowledge-based and Style-based.

Knowledge-based: Since fake news attempts to spread
false claims in news content, the most straightforward means
of detecting it is to check the truthfulness of major claims
in a news article to decide the news veracity. Knowledge-
based approaches aim to use external sources to fact-check
proposed claims in news content. The goal of fact-checking is
to assign a truth value to a claim in a particular context [83].
Fact-checking has attracted increasing attention, and many
eﬀorts have been made to develop a feasible automated fact-
checking system. Existing fact-checking approaches can be
categorized as expert-oriented, crowdsourcing-oriented, and
computational-oriented.

• Expert-oriented fact-checking heavily relies on human
domain experts to investigate relevant data and doc-
uments to construct the verdicts of claim veracity, for
example PolitiFact11, Snopes12, etc. However, expert-
oriented fact-checking is an intellectually demanding
and time-consuming process, which limits the poten-
tial for high eﬃciency and scalability.

• Crowdsourcing-oriented fact-checking exploits the “wis-
dom of crowd” to enable normal people to annotate
news content; these annotations are then aggregated
to produce an overall assessment of the news verac-
ity. For example, Fiskkit13 allows users to discuss and
annotate the accuracy of speciﬁc parts of a news arti-
cle. As another example, an anti-fake news bot named
“For real” is a public account in the instant communi-
cation mobile application LINE14, which allows people
to report suspicious news content which is then further
checked by editors.

• Computational-oriented fact-checking aims to provide
an automatic scalable system to classify true and false
claims. Previous computational-oriented fact checking
methods try to solve two majors issues: (i) identifying

11http://www.politifact.com/
12http://www.snopes.com/
13http://ﬁskkit.com
14https://grants.g0v.tw/projects/588fa7b382223f001e022944

check-worthy claims and (ii) discriminating the verac-
ity of fact claims. To identify check-worthy claims, fac-
tual claims in news content are extracted that convey
key statements and viewpoints, facilitating the subse-
quent fact-checking process [31]. Fact-checking for spe-
ciﬁc claims largely relies on external resources to deter-
mine the truthfulness of a particular claim. Two typ-
ical external sources include the open web and struc-
tured knowledge graph. Open web sources are utilized
as references that can be compared with given claims
in terms of both the consistency and frequency [5; 50].
Knowledge graphs are integrated from the linked open
data as a structured network topology, such as DB-
pedia and Google Relation Extraction Corpus. Fact-
checking using a knowledge graph aims to check whether
the claims in news content can be inferred from exist-
ing facts in the knowledge graph [98; 16; 72].

Style-based: Fake news publishers often have malicious
intent to spread distorted and misleading information and
inﬂuence large communities of consumers, requiring partic-
ular writing styles necessary to appeal to and persuade a
wide scope of consumers that is not seen in true news ar-
ticles. Style-based approaches try to detect fake news by
capturing the manipulators in the writing style of news con-
tent. There are mainly two typical categories of style-based
methods: Deception-oriented and Objectivity-oriented.

• Deception-oriented stylometric methods capture the
deceptive statements or claims from news content. The
motivation of deception detection originates from foren-
sic psychology (i.e., Undeutsch Hypothesis) [82] and
various forensic tools including Criteria-based Content
Analysis [84] and Scientiﬁc-based Content Analysis [45]
have been developed. More recently, advanced natu-
ral language processing models are applied to spot de-
ception phases from the following perspectives: Deep
syntax and Rhetorical structure. Deep syntax models
have been implemented using probabilistic context fr-
ree grammers (PCFG), with which sentences can be
transformed into rules that describe the syntax struc-
ture. Based on the PCFG, diﬀerent rules can be de-
veloped for deception detection, such as unlexicalized/
lexicalized production rules and grandparent rules [22].
Rhetorical structure theory can be utilized to capture
the diﬀerences between deceptive and truthful sen-
tences [68]. Deep network models, such as convolu-
tional neural networks (CNN), have also been applied
to classify fake news veracity [90].

• Objectivity-oriented approaches capture style signals
that can indicate a decreased objectivity of news con-
tent and thus the potential to mislead consumers, such
as hyperpartisan styles and yellow-journalism. Hyper-
partisan styles represent extreme behavior in favor of a
particular political party, which often correlates with
a strong motivation to create fake news. Linguistic-
based features can be applied to detect hyperpartisan
articles [62]. Yellow-journalism represents those ar-
ticles that do not contain well-researched news, but
instead rely on eye-catching headlines (i.e., clickbait)
with a propensity for exaggeration, sensationalization,
scare-mongering, etc. Often, news titles will summa-
rize the major viewpoints of the article that the author

wants to convey, and thus misleading and deceptive
clickbait titles can serve as a good indicator for recog-
nizing fake news articles [13].

Social Context Models

3.3.2
The nature of social media provides researchers with ad-
ditional resources to supplement and enhance News Con-
tent Models. Social context models include relevant user
social engagements in the analysis, capturing this auxiliary
information from a variety of perspectives. We can clas-
sify existing approaches for social context modeling into two
categories: Stance-based and Propagation-based. Note that
very few existing fake news detection approaches have uti-
lized social context models. Thus, we also introduce similar
methods for rumor detection using social media, which have
potential application for fake news detection.

Stance-based: Stance-based approaches utilize users’ view-
points from relevant post contents to infer the veracity of
original news articles. The stance of users’ posts can be
represented either explicitly or implicitly. Explicit stances
are direct expressions of emotion or opinion, such as the
“thumbs up” and “thumbs down” reactions expressed in
Facebook. Implicit stances can be automatically extracted
from social media posts. Stance detection is the task of
automatically determining from a post whether the user is
in favor of, neutral toward, or against some target entity,
event, or idea [53]. Previous stance classiﬁcation methods
mainly rely on hand-crafted linguistic or embedding features
on individual posts to predict stances [53; 64]. Topic model
methods, such as latent dirichlet allocation (LDA) can be
applied to learn latent stance from topics [37]. Using these
methods, we can infer the news veracity based on the stance
values of relevant posts. Tacchini et al. proposed to con-
struct a bipartite network of user and Facebook posts using
the “like” stance information [75]; based on this network,
a semi-supervised probabilistic model was used to predict
the likelihood of Facebook posts being hoaxes. Jin et al.
explored topic models to learn latent viewpoint values and
further exploited these viewpoints to learn the credibility of
relevant posts and news content [37].

Propagation-based: Propagation-based approaches for fake
news detection reason about the interrelations of relevant
social media posts to predict news credibility. The basic
assumption is that the credibility of a news event is highly
related to the credibilities of relevant social media posts.
Both homogeneous and heterogeneous credibility networks
can be built for propagation process. Homogeneous credi-
bility networks consist of a single type of entities, such as
post or event [37]. Heterogeneous credibility networks in-
volve diﬀerent types of entities, such as posts, sub-events,
and events [36; 29]. Gupta et al. proposed a PageRank-like
credibility propagation algorithm by encoding users’ credi-
bilities and tweets’ implications on a three layer user-tweet-
event heterogeneous information network. Jin et al. pro-
posed to include news aspects (i.e., latent sub-events), build
a three-layer hierarchical network, and utilize a graph op-
timization framework to infer event credibilities. Recently,
the conﬂicting viewpoint relationships are included to build
a homogeneous credibility network among tweets and guide
the process to evaluate their credibilities [37].

4. ASSESSING DETECTION EFFICACY
In this section, we discuss how to assess the performance of
algorithms for fake news detection. We focus on the avail-
able datasets and evaluation metrics for this task.

4.1 Datasets
Online news can be collected from diﬀerent sources, such
as news agency homepages, search engines, and social me-
dia websites. However, manually determining the verac-
ity of news is a challenging task, usually requiring annota-
tors with domain expertise who performs careful analysis of
claims and additional evidence, context, and reports from
authoritative sources. Generally, news data with annota-
tions can be gathered in the following ways: Expert journal-
ists, Fact-checking websites, Industry detectors, and Crowd-
sourced workers. However, there are no agreed upon bench-
mark datasets for the fake news detection problem. Some
publicly available datasets are listed below:

• BuzzFeedNews 15: This dataset comprises a complete
sample of news published in Facebook from 9 news
agencies over a week close to the 2016 U.S. election
from September 19 to 23 and September 26 and 27.
Every post and the linked article were fact-checked
claim-by-claim by 5 BuzzFeed journalists. This dataset
is further enriched in [62] by adding the linked articles,
It contains
attached media, and relevant metadata.
1,627 articles–826 mainstream, 356 left-wing, and 545
right-wing articles.

• LIAR16: This dataset is collected from fact-checking
It includes
website PolitiFact through its API [90].
12,836 human-labeled short statements, which are sam-
pled from various contexts, such as news releases, TV
or radio interviews, campaign speeches, etc. The labels
for news truthfulness are ﬁne-grained multiple classes:
pants-ﬁre, false, barely-true, half-true, mostly true,
and true.

• BS Detector 17: This dataset is collected from a browser
extension called BS detector developed for checking
news veracity18. It searches all links on a given web-
page for references to unreliable sources by checking
against a manually complied list of domains. The la-
bels are the outputs of BS detector, rather than human
annotators.

• CREDBANK 19: This is a large scale crowdsourced
dataset of approximately 60 million tweets that cover
96 days starting from October 2015. All the tweets are
broken down to be related to over 1,000 news events,
with each event assessed for credibilities by 30 anno-
tators from Amazon Mechanical Turk [52].

these datasets also have speciﬁc limitation that make them
challenging to use for fake news detection. BuzzFeedNews
only contains headlines and text for each news piece and
covers news articles from very few news agencies. LIAR in-
cludes mostly short statements, rather than the entire news
content. Further, these statements are collected from vari-
ous speakers, rather than news publishers, and may include
some claims that are not fake news. BS Detector data is
collected and annotated by using a developed news veracity
checking tool. As the labels have not been properly vali-
dated by human experts, any model trained on this data is
really learning the parameters of BS Detector, rather than
expert-annotated ground truth fake news. Finally, CRED-
BANK was originally collected for tweet credibility assess-
ment, so the tweets in this dataset are not really the social
engagements for speciﬁc news articles.
To address the disadvantages of existing fake news detec-
tion datasets, we have an ongoing project to develop a us-
able dataset for fake news detection on social media. This
dataset, called F akeN ewsN et20, includes all mentioned news
content and social context features with reliable ground truth
fake news labels.

4.2 Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the performance of algorithms for fake news de-
tection problem, various evaluation metrics have been used.
In this subsection, we review the most widely used metrics
for fake news detection. Most existing approaches consider
the fake news problem as a classiﬁcation problem that pre-
dicts whether a news article is fake or not:

• True Positive (TP): when predicted fake news pieces

are actually annotated as fake news;

• True Negative (TN): when predicted true news pieces

are actually annotated as true news;

• False Negative (FN): when predicted true news pieces

are actually annotated as fake news;

• False Positive (FP): when predicted fake news pieces

are actually annotated as true news.

By formulating this as a classiﬁcation problem, we can deﬁne
following metrics,

P recision =

Recall =

|T P |
|T P | + |F P |
|T P |
|T P | + |F N |

F 1 = 2 ·

P recision · Recall
P recision + Recall

Accuracy =

|T P | + |T N |
|T P | + |T N | + |F P | + |F N |

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

In Table 1, we compare these public fake news detection
datasets, highlighting the features that can be extracted
from each dataset. We can see that no existing public dataset
In addition,
can provide all possible features of interest.

15https://github.com/BuzzFeedNews/2016-10-facebook-
fact-check/tree/master/data
16https://www.cs.ucsb.edu/ william/data/liar dataset.zip
17https://www.kaggle.com/mrisdal/fake-news
18https://github.com/bs-detector/bs-detector
19http://compsocial.github.io/CREDBANK-data/

These metrics are commonly used in the machine learning
community and enable us to evaluate the performance of a
classiﬁer from diﬀerent perspectives. Speciﬁcally, accuracy
measures the similarity between predicted fake news and real
fake news. Precision measures the fraction of all detected
fake news that are annotated as fake news, addressing the
important problem of identifying which news is fake. How-
ever, because fake news datasets are often skewed, a high
precision can be easily achieved by making fewer positive

20https://github.com/KaiDMML/FakeNewsNet

Table 1: Comparison of Fake News Detection Datasets.

Features

News Content

Social Context

Dataset

Linguistic Visual User Post Network

BuzzFeedNews

LIAR

BS Detector

CREDBANK

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

predictions. Thus, recall is used to measure the sensitivity,
or the fraction of annotated fake news articles that are pre-
dicted to be fake news. F1 is used to combine precision and
recall, which can provide an overall prediction performance
for fake news detection. Note that for P recision, Recall,
F1, and Accuracy, the higher the value, the better the per-
formance.
The Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve pro-
vides a way of comparing the performance of classiﬁers by
looking at the trade-oﬀ in the False Positive Rate (FPR) and
the True Positive Rate (TPR). To draw the ROC curve, we
plot the FPR on the x axis and and TPR along the y axis.
The ROC curve compares the performance of diﬀerent clas-
siﬁers by changing class distributions via a threshold. TPR
and FPR are deﬁned as follows (note that TPR is the same
as recall deﬁned above):

T P R =

F P R =

|T P |
|T P | + |F N |
|F P |
|F P | + |T N |

(6)

(7)

Based on the ROC curve, we can compute the Area Under
the Curve (AUC) value, which measures the overall perfor-
mance of how likely the classiﬁer is to rank the fake news
higher than any true news. Based on [30], AUC is deﬁned
as below.

AU C =

(cid:80)(n0 + n1 + 1 − ri) − n0(n0 + 1)/2
n0n1

(8)

where ri is the rank of ith fake news piece and n0 (n1) is
It is worth men-
the number of fake (true) news pieces.
tioning that AUC is more statistically consistent and more
discriminating than accuracy [47], and it is usually applied
in an imbalanced classiﬁcation problem, such as fake news
classiﬁcation, where the number of ground truth fake news
articles and and true news articles have a very imbalanced
distribution.

5. RELATED AREAS
In this section, we further discuss areas that are related to
the problem of fake news detection. We aim to point out
the diﬀerences between these areas and fake news detection
by brieﬂy explaining the task goals and highlighting some
popular methods.

5.1 Rumor Classiﬁcation
A rumor can usually be deﬁned as “a piece of circulating
information whose veracity status is yet to be veriﬁed at
the time of spreading” [102]. The function of a rumor is
to make sense of an ambiguous situation, and the truthful-
ness value could be true, false or unveriﬁed. Previous ap-
proaches for rumor analysis focus on four subtasks: rumor

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

detection, rumor tracking, stance classiﬁcation, and verac-
ity classiﬁcation [102]. Speciﬁcally, rumor detection aims to
classify a piece of information as rumor or non-rumor [96;
70]; rumor tracking aims to collect and ﬁlter posts discussing
speciﬁc rumors; rumor stance classiﬁcation determines how
each relevant post is oriented with respect to the rumor’s
veracity; veracity classiﬁcation attempts to predict the ac-
tual truth value of the rumor. The most related task to fake
news detection is the rumor veracity classiﬁcation. Rumor
veracity classiﬁcation relies heavily on the other subtasks,
requiring the stances or opinions can be extracted from rel-
evant posts. These posts are considered as important sen-
sors for determining the veracity of the rumor. Diﬀerent
from rumors, which may include long-term rumors, such as
conspiracy theories, as well as short-term emerging rumors,
fake news refers to information related speciﬁcally to public
news events that can be veriﬁed as false.

5.2 Truth Discovery
Truth discovery is the problem of detecting true facts from
multiple conﬂicting sources [46]. Truth discovery methods
do not explore the fact claims directly, but rely on a collec-
tion of contradicting sources that record the properties of
objects to determine the truth value. Truth discovery aims
to determine the source credibility and object truthfulness
at the same time. The fake news detection problem can
beneﬁt from various aspects of truth discovery approaches
under diﬀerent scenarios. First, the credibility of diﬀerent
news outlets can be modeled to infer the truthfulness of re-
ported news. Second, relevant social media posts can also
be modeled as social response sources to better determine
the truthfulness of claims [56; 93]. However, there are some
other issues that must be considered to apply truth discovery
to fake news detection in social media scenarios. First, most
existing truth discovery methods focus on handling struc-
tured input in the form of Subject-Predicate-Object (SPO)
tuples, while social media data is highly unstructured and
noisy. Second, truth discovery methods can not be well ap-
plied when a fake news article is newly launched and pub-
lished by only a few news outlets because at that point there
is not enough social media posts relevant to it to serve as
additional sources.

5.3 Clickbait Detection
Clickbait is a term commonly used to describe eye-catching
and teaser headlines in online media. Clickbait headlines
create a so-called “curiosity gap”, increasing the likelihood
that reader will click the target link to satisfy their curios-
ity. Existing clickbait detection approaches utilize various
linguistic features extracted from teaser messages, linked
webpages, and tweet meta information [12; 8; 63]. Diﬀer-
ent types of clickbait are categorized, and some of them are
highly correlated with non-factual claims [7]. The underly-

ing motivation of clickbait is usually for click-through rates
and the resultant advertising revenue. Thus, the body text
of clickbait articles are often informally organized and poorly
reasoned. This discrepancy has been used by researchers to
identify the inconsistency between headlines and news con-
tents in an attempt to detect fake news articles21. Even
though not all fake news may include clickbait headlines,
speciﬁc clickbait headlines could serve as an important in-
dicator, and various features can be utilized to help detect
fake news.

5.4 Spammer and Bot Detection
Spammer detection on social media, which aims to cap-
ture malicious users that coordinate among themselves to
launch various attacks, such as spreading ads, disseminat-
ing pornography, delivering viruses, and phishing [44], has
recently attracted wide attention. Existing approaches for
social spammer detection mainly rely on extracting features
from user activities and social network information [35; 95;
33; 34]. In addition, the rise of social bots has also increased
the circulation of false information as they automatically
retweet posts without verifying the facts [23]. The major
challenge brought by social bots is that they can give a false
impression that information is highly popular and endorsed
by many people, which enables the echo chamber eﬀect for
the propagation of fake news. Previous approaches for bot
detection are based on social network information, crowd-
sourcing, and discriminative features [23; 55; 54]. Thus,
both spammer and social bots could provide insights about
target speciﬁc malicious social media accounts that can be
used for fake news detection.

6. OPEN ISSUES AND FUTURE RESEARCH
In this section, we present some open issues in fake news
detection and future research directions. Fake news detec-
tion on social media is a newly emerging research area, so
we aim to point out promising research directions from a
data mining perspective. Speciﬁcally, as shown in Figure 2,
we outline the research directions in four categories: Data-
oriented, Feature-oriented, Model-oriented and Application-
oriented.

Data-oriented: Data-oriented fake news research is fo-
cusing on diﬀerent kinds of data characteristics, such as :
dataset, temporal and psychological. From a dataset per-
spective, we demonstrated that there is no existing bench-
mark dataset that includes resources to extract all relevant
features. A promising direction is to create a comprehensive
and large-scale fake news benchmark dataset, which can be
used by researchers to facilitate further research in this area.
From a temporal perspective, fake news dissemination on so-
cial media demonstrates unique temporal patterns diﬀerent
from true news. Along this line, one interesting problem
is to perform early fake news detection, which aims to give
early alerts of fake news during the dissemination process.
For example, this approach could look at only social media
posts within some time delay of the original post as sources
for news veriﬁcation [37]. Detecting fake news early can help
prevent further propagation on social media. From a psycho-
logical perspective, diﬀerent aspects of fake news have been
qualitatively explored in the social psychology literature [92;

21http://www.fakenewschallenge.org/

58; 59], but quantitative studies to verify these psychological
factors are rather limited. For example, the echo chamber
eﬀect plays an important role for fake news spreading in so-
cial media. Then how to capture echo chamber eﬀects and
how to utilize the pattern for fake news detection in social
media could be an interesting investigation. Moreover, in-
tention detection from news data is promising but limited
as most existing fake news research focus on detecting the
authenticity but ignore the intent aspect of fake news. In-
tention detection is very challenging as the intention is often
explicitly unavailable. Thus.
it’s worth to explore how to
use data mining methods to validate and capture psychol-
ogy intentions.

Feature-oriented: Feature-oriented fake news research aims
to determine eﬀective features for detecting fake news from
multiple data sources. We have demonstrated that there are
two major data sources: news content and social context.
From a news content perspective, we introduced linguistic-
based and visual-based techniques to extract features from
text information. Note that linguistic-based features have
been widely studied for general NLP tasks, such as text clas-
siﬁcation and clustering, and speciﬁc applications such as
author identiﬁcation [32] and deception detection [22], but
the underlying characteristics of fake news have not been
fully understood. Moreover, embedding techniques, such as
word embedding and deep neural networks, are attracting
much attention for textual feature extraction, and has the
potential to learn better representations [90; 87; 88]. In ad-
dition, visual features extracted from images are also shown
to be important indicators for fake news [38]. However, very
limited research has been done to exploit eﬀective visual fea-
tures, including traditional local and global features [61] and
newly emerging deep network-based features [43; 89; 85],
for the fake news detection problem. Recently, it has been
shown that advanced tools can manipulate video footage of
public ﬁgures [80], synthesize high quality videos [74], etc.
Thus, it becomes much more challenging and important to
diﬀerentiate real and fake visual content, and more advanced
visual-based features are needed for this research. From a
social context perspective, we introduced user-based, post-
based, and network-based features. Existing user-based fea-
tures mainly focus on general user proﬁles, rather than dif-
ferentiating account types separately and extracting user-
speciﬁc features. Post-based features can be represented us-
ing other techniques, such as convolutional neural networks
(CNN) [69], to better capture people’s opinions and reac-
tions toward fake news. Images in social media posts can
also be utilized to better understand users’ sentiments [91]
toward news events. Network-based features are extracted
to represent how diﬀerent types of networks are constructed.
It is important to extend this preliminary work to explore
(i) how other networks can be constructed in terms of diﬀer-
ent aspects of relationships among relevant users and posts;
and (ii) other advanced methods of network representations,
such as network embedding [78; 86].

Model-oriented: Model-oriented fake news research opens
the door to building more eﬀective and practical models for
fake news detection. Most previously mentioned approaches
focus on extracting various features, incorporating theses
features into supervised classiﬁcation models, such as na¨ıve
Bayes, decision tree, logistic regression, k nearest neighbor

Figure 2: Future directions and open issues for fake news detection on social media.

(KNN), and support vector machines (SVM), and then se-
lecting the classiﬁer that performs the best [62; 75; 1]. More
research can be done to build more complex and eﬀective
models and to better utilize extracted features, such as ag-
gregation methods, probabilistic methods, ensemble methods,
or projection methods [73]. Speciﬁcally, we think there is
some promising research in the following directions. First,
aggregation methods combine diﬀerent feature representa-
tions into a weighted form and optimize the feature weights.
Second, since fake news may commonly mix true statements
with false claims, it may make more sense to predict the
likelihood of fake news instead of producing a binary value;
probabilistic models predict a probabilistic distribution of
class labels (i.e., fake news versus true news) by assuming
a generative model that pulls from the same distribution as
the original feature space [25]. Third, one of the major chal-
lenges for fake news detection is the fact that each feature,
such as source credibility, news content style, or social re-
sponse, has some limitations to directly predict fake news on
its own. Ensemble methods build a conjunction of several
weak classiﬁers to learn a strong classiﬁer that is more suc-
cessful than any individual classiﬁer alone; ensembles have
been widely applied to various applications in the machine
learning literature [20]. It may be beneﬁcial to build ensem-
ble models as news content and social context features each
have supplementary information that has the potential to
boost fake news detection performance. Finally, fake news
content or social context information may be noisy in the
raw feature space; projection methods refer to approaches
that lean projection functions to map between original fea-
ture spaces (e.g., news content features and social context
features) and the latent feature spaces that may be more
useful for classiﬁcation.
Moreover, most existing approaches are supervised, which
requires a pre-annotated fake news ground truth dataset
to train a model. However, obtaining a reliable fake news
dataset is very time and labor intensive, as the process of-
ten requires expert annotators to perform careful analysis of
claims and additional evidence, context, and reports from
authoritative sources. Thus, it is also important to con-
sider scenarios where limited or no labeled fake news pieces
are available in which semi-supervised or unsupervised mod-
els can be applied. While the models created by super-

vised classiﬁcation methods may be more accurate given a
well-curated ground truth dataset for training, unsupervised
models can be more practical because unlabeled datasets are
easier to obtain.

Application-oriented: Application-oriented fake news re-
search encompass research that goes into other areas beyond
fake news detection. We propose two major directions along
these lines: fake news diﬀusion and fake news intervention.
Fake news diﬀusion characterizes the diﬀusion paths and
patterns of fake news on social media sites. Some early re-
search has shown that true information and misinformation
follow diﬀerent patterns when propagating in online social
networks [18; 51]. Similarly, the diﬀusion of fake news in
social media demonstrates its own characteristics that need
further investigation, such as social dimensions, life cycle,
spreader identiﬁcation, etc. Social dimensions refer to the
heterogeneity and weak dependency of social connections
within diﬀerent social communities. Users’ perceptions of
fake news pieces are highly aﬀected by their like-minded
friends in social media (i.e., echo chambers), while the de-
gree diﬀers along diﬀerent social dimensions. Thus, it is
worth exploring why and how diﬀerent social dimensions
play a role in spreading fake news in terms of diﬀerent top-
ics, such as political, education, sports, etc. The fake news
diﬀusion process also has diﬀerent stages in terms of peo-
ple’s attentions and reactions as time goes by, resulting in
a unique life cycle. Research has shown that breaking news
and in-depth news demonstrate diﬀerent life cycles in social
media [10]. Studying the life cycle of fake news will provide
deeper understanding of how particular stories “go viral”
from normal public discourse. Tracking the life cycle of fake
news on social media requires recording essential trajectories
of fake news diﬀusion in general [71], as well as further in-
vestigations of the process for speciﬁc fake news pieces, such
as graph-based models and evolution-based models [27]. In
addition, identifying key spreaders of fake news is crucial to
mitigate the diﬀusion scope in social media. Note that key
spreaders can be categorized in two ways, i.e., stance and
authenticity. Along the stance dimensions, spreaders can
either be (i) clariﬁers, who propose skeptical and opposing
viewpoints towards fake news and try to clarify them; or (ii)
persuaders, who spread fake news with supporting opinions

to persuade others to believe it. In this sense, it is impor-
tant to explore how to detect clariﬁers and persuaders and
better use them to control the dissemination of fake news.
From an authenticity perspective, spreaders could be either
human, bot, or cyborg. Social bots have been used to inten-
tionally spread fake news in social media, which motivates
further research to better characterize and detect malicious
accounts designed for propaganda.
Finally, we also propose further research into fake news in-
tervention, which aims to reduce the eﬀects of fake news
by proactive intervention methods that minimize the spread
scope or reactive intervention methods after fake news goes
viral. Proactive fake news intervention methods try to (i)
remove malicious accounts that spread fake news or fake
news itself to isolate it from future consumers; (ii) immu-
nize users with true news to change the belief of users that
may already have been aﬀected by fake news. There is recent
research that attempts to use content-based immunization
and network-based immunization methods in misinforma-
tion intervention [94; 97]. One approach uses a multivariate
Hawkes process to model both true news and fake news and
mitigate the spreading of fake news in real-time [21]. The
aforementioned spreader detection techniques can also be
applied to target certain users (e.g., persuaders) in social
media to stop spreading fake news, or other users (e.g. clar-
iﬁers) to maximize the spread of corresponding true news.

7. CONCLUSION
With the increasing popularity of social media, more and
more people consume news from social media instead of tra-
ditional news media. However, social media has also been
used to spread fake news, which has strong negative impacts
on individual users and broader society. In this article, we
explored the fake news problem by reviewing existing lit-
erature in two phases: characterization and detection.
In
the characterization phase, we introduced the basic concepts
and principles of fake news in both traditional media and so-
cial media. In the detection phase, we reviewed existing fake
news detection approaches from a data mining perspective,
including feature extraction and model construction. We
also further discussed the datasets, evaluation metrics, and
promising future directions in fake news detection research
and expand the ﬁeld to other applications.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by, or in part
by, the ONR grant N00014-16-1-2257.

9. REFERENCES

[1] Sadia Afroz, Michael Brennan, and Rachel Green-
stadt. Detecting hoaxes, frauds, and deception in writ-
ing style online. In ISSP’12.

[2] Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow. Social media
and fake news in the 2016 election. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.

[3] Solomon E Asch and H Guetzkow. Eﬀects of group
pressure upon the modiﬁcation and distortion of judg-
ments. Groups, leadership, and men, pages 222–236,
1951.

[4] Meital Balmas. When fake news becomes real: Com-
bined exposure to multiple news sources and political
attitudes of ineﬃcacy, alienation, and cynicism. Com-
munication Research, 41(3):430–454, 2014.

[5] Michele Banko, Michael J Cafarella, Stephen Soder-
land, Matthew Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. Open
information extraction from the web. In IJCAI’07.

[6] Alessandro Bessi and Emilio Ferrara. Social bots dis-
tort the 2016 us presidential election online discussion.
First Monday, 21(11), 2016.

[7] Prakhar Biyani, Kostas Tsioutsiouliklis, and John
Blackmer. ” 8 amazing secrets for getting more clicks”:
Detecting clickbaits in news streams using article in-
formality. In AAAI’16.

[8] Jonas Nygaard Blom and Kenneth Reinecke Hansen.
Click bait: Forward-reference as lure in online news
headlines. Journal of Pragmatics, 76:87–100, 2015.

[9] Paul R Brewer, Dannagal Goldthwaite Young, and
Michelle Morreale. The impact of real news about
fake news: Intertextual processes and political satire.
International Journal of Public Opinion Research,
25(3):323–343, 2013.

[10] Carlos Castillo, Mohammed El-Haddad, J¨urgen Pfef-
fer, and Matt Stempeck. Characterizing the life cycle
of online news stories using social media reactions. In
CSCW’14.

[11] Carlos Castillo, Marcelo Mendoza, and Barbara
In

Information credibility on twitter.

Poblete.
WWW’11.

[12] Abhijnan Chakraborty, Bhargavi Paranjape, Sourya
Kakarla, and Niloy Ganguly. Stop clickbait: Detect-
ing and preventing clickbaits in online news media. In
ASONAM’16.

[13] Yimin Chen, Niall J Conroy, and Victoria L Rubin.
Misleading online content: Recognizing clickbait as
false news. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM on Work-
shop on Multimodal Deception Detection, pages 15–19.
ACM, 2015.

[14] Justin Cheng, Michael Bernstein, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, and Jure Leskovec. Anyone can be-
come a troll: Causes of trolling behavior in online dis-
cussions. In CSCW ’17.

[15] Zi Chu, Steven Gianvecchio, Haining Wang, and
Sushil Jajodia. Detecting automation of twitter ac-
counts: Are you a human, bot, or cyborg?
IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
9(6):811–824, 2012.

[16] Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia, Prashant Shiralkar,
Luis M Rocha, Johan Bollen, Filippo Menczer, and
Alessandro Flammini. Computational fact checking
from knowledge networks. PloS one, 10(6):e0128193,
2015.

[17] Niall J Conroy, Victoria L Rubin, and Yimin Chen.
Automatic deception detection: Methods for ﬁnding
fake news. Proceedings of the Association for Infor-
mation Science and Technology, 52(1):1–4, 2015.

[18] Michela Del Vicario, Alessandro Bessi, Fabiana Zollo,
Fabio Petroni, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli, H Eu-

gene Stanley, and Walter Quattrociocchi. The spread-
ing of misinformation online. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 113(3):554–559, 2016.

[19] Michela Del Vicario, Gianna Vivaldo, Alessandro
Bessi, Fabiana Zollo, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli,
and Walter Quattrociocchi. Echo chambers: Emo-
tional contagion and group polarization on facebook.
Scientiﬁc Reports, 6, 2016.

[20] Thomas G Dietterich et al. Ensemble methods in ma-
chine learning. Multiple classiﬁer systems, 1857:1–15,
2000.

[21] Mehrdad Farajtabar, Jiachen Yang, Xiaojing Ye,
Huan Xu, Rakshit Trivedi, Elias Khalil, Shuang Li,
Le Song, and Hongyuan Zha. Fake news mitigation
via point process based intervention. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.07823, 2017.

[22] Song Feng, Ritwik Banerjee, and Yejin Choi. Syntactic
stylometry for deception detection. In ACL’12.

[23] Emilio Ferrara, Onur Varol, Clayton Davis, Filippo
Menczer, and Alessandro Flammini. The rise of so-
cial bots. Communications of the ACM, 59(7):96–104,
2016.

[24] Johannes F¨urnkranz. A study using n-gram features
for text categorization. Austrian Research Institute for
Artiﬁcal Intelligence, 3(1998):1–10, 1998.

[25] Ashutosh Garg and Dan Roth. Understanding proba-

bilistic classiﬁers. ECML’01.

[26] Matthew Gentzkow, Jesse M Shapiro, and Daniel F
Stone. Media bias in the marketplace: Theory. Tech-
nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
2014.

[27] Adrien Guille, Hakim Hacid, Cecile Favre, and
Djamel A Zighed. Information diﬀusion in online social
networks: A survey. ACM Sigmod Record, 42(2):17–
28, 2013.

[28] Aditi Gupta, Hemank Lamba, Ponnurangam Ku-
maraguru, and Anupam Joshi. Faking sandy: charac-
terizing and identifying fake images on twitter during
hurricane sandy. In WWW’13.

[29] Manish Gupta, Peixiang Zhao, and Jiawei Han. Eval-
uating event credibility on twitter. In PSDM’12.

[30] David J Hand and Robert J Till. A simple generalisa-
tion of the area under the roc curve for multiple class
classiﬁcation problems. Machine learning, 2001.

[31] Naeemul Hassan, Chengkai Li, and Mark Tremayne.
Detecting check-worthy factual claims in presidential
debates. In CIKM’15.

[32] John Houvardas and Efstathios Stamatatos. N-gram
feature selection for authorship identiﬁcation. Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence: Methodology, Systems, and Applica-
tions, pages 77–86, 2006.

[33] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, Huiji Gao, and Huan Liu. So-
cial spammer detection with sentiment information. In
ICDM’14.

[34] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, and Huan Liu. Online social

spammer detection. In AAAI’14, pages 59–65, 2014.

[35] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, Yanchao Zhang, and Huan Liu.

Social spammer detection in microblogging. In IJ-
CAI’13.

[36] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Yongdong
Zhang. News credibility evaluation on microblog with
a hierarchical propagation model. In ICDM’14.

[37] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yongdong Zhang, and Jiebo
Luo. News veriﬁcation by exploiting conﬂicting social
viewpoints in microblogs. In AAAI’16.

[38] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yongdong Zhang, Jianshe Zhou,
and Qi Tian. Novel visual and statistical image fea-
tures for microblogs news veriﬁcation. IEEE Transac-
tions on Multimedia, 19(3):598–608, 2017.

[39] Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. Prospect the-
ory: An analysis of decision under risk. Economet-
rica: Journal of the econometric society, pages 263–
291, 1979.

[40] Jean-Noel Kapferer. Rumors: Uses, Interpretation

and Necessity. Routledge, 2017.

[41] David O Klein and Joshua R Wueller. Fake news: A

legal perspective. 2017.

[42] Sejeong Kwon, Meeyoung Cha, Kyomin Jung, Wei
Chen, and Yajun Wang. Prominent features of rumor
propagation in online social media. In ICDM’13, pages
1103–1108. IEEE, 2013.

[43] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoﬀrey Hinton.
Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444, 2015.

[44] Kyumin Lee, James Caverlee, and Steve Webb. Un-
covering social spammers: social honeypots+ machine
learning. In SIGIR’10.

[45] Tony Lesce. Scan: Deception detection by scientiﬁc
content analysis. Law and Order, 38(8):3–6, 1990.

[46] Yaliang Li, Jing Gao, Chuishi Meng, Qi Li, Lu Su,
Bo Zhao, Wei Fan, and Jiawei Han. A survey on
truth discovery. ACM Sigkdd Explorations Newsletter,
17(2):1–16, 2016.

[47] Charles X Ling, Jin Huang, and Harry Zhang. Auc: a
statistically consistent and more discriminating mea-
sure than accuracy.

[48] Jing Ma, Wei Gao, Prasenjit Mitra, Sejeong Kwon,
Bernard J Jansen, Kam-Fai Wong, and Meeyoung
Cha. Detecting rumors from microblogs with recur-
rent neural networks.

[49] Jing Ma, Wei Gao, Zhongyu Wei, Yueming Lu, and
Kam-Fai Wong. Detect rumors using time series of so-
cial context information on microblogging websites. In
CIKM’15.

[50] Amr Magdy and Nayer Wanas. Web-based statistical
fact checking of textual documents. In Proceedings of
the 2nd international workshop on Search and mining
user-generated contents, pages 103–110. ACM, 2010.

[51] Filippo Menczer. The spread of misinformation in so-

cial media. In WWW’16.

[52] Tanushree Mitra and Eric Gilbert. Credbank: A large-
scale social media corpus with associated credibility
annotations. In ICWSM’15.

[53] Saif M Mohammad, Parinaz Sobhani, and Svet-
lana Kiritchenko. Stance and sentiment in tweets.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT),
17(3):26, 2017.

Huan Liu. Leveraging the implicit structure within so-
cial media for emergent rumor detection. In CIKM’15.

[54] Fred Morstatter, Harsh Dani, Justin Sampson, and
Huan Liu. Can one tamper with the sample api?: To-
ward neutralizing bias from spam and bot content. In
WWW’16.

[55] Fred Morstatter, Liang Wu, Tahora H Nazer, Kath-
leen M Carley, and Huan Liu. A new approach to bot
detection: Striking the balance between precision and
recall. In ASONAM’16.

[56] Subhabrata Mukherjee and Gerhard Weikum. Lever-
aging joint interactions for credibility analysis in news
communities. In CIKM’15.

[57] Eni Mustafaraj and Panagiotis Takis Metaxas. The
fake news spreading plague: Was it preventable?
arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.06988, 2017.

[58] Raymond S Nickerson. Conﬁrmation bias: A ubiqui-
tous phenomenon in many guises. Review of general
psychology, 2(2):175, 1998.

[59] Brendan Nyhan and Jason Reiﬂer. When corrections
fail: The persistence of political misperceptions. Po-
litical Behavior, 32(2):303–330, 2010.

[60] Christopher Paul and Miriam Matthews. The russian

ﬁrehose of falsehood propaganda model.

[61] Dong ping Tian et al. A review on image feature ex-
traction and representation techniques. International
Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering,
8(4):385–396, 2013.

[62] Martin Potthast, Johannes Kiesel, Kevin Reinartz,
Janek Bevendorﬀ, and Benno Stein. A stylometric in-
quiry into hyperpartisan and fake news. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.05638, 2017.

[63] Martin Potthast, Sebastian K¨opsel, Benno Stein, and
Matthias Hagen. Clickbait detection. In European
Conference on Information Retrieval, pages 810–817.
Springer, 2016.

[64] Vahed Qazvinian, Emily Rosengren, Dragomir R
Radev, and Qiaozhu Mei. Rumor has it: Identifying
misinformation in microblogs. In EMNLP’11.

[65] Walter Quattrociocchi, Antonio Scala, and Cass R

Sunstein. Echo chambers on facebook. 2016.

[66] Victoria L Rubin, Yimin Chen, and Niall J Conroy.
Deception detection for news: three types of fakes.
Proceedings of the Association for Information Science
and Technology, 52(1):1–4, 2015.

[67] Victoria L Rubin, Niall J Conroy, Yimin Chen, and
Sarah Cornwell. Fake news or truth? using satirical
cues to detect potentially misleading news. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 7–17, 2016.

[68] Victoria L Rubin and Tatiana Lukoianova. Truth and
deception at the rhetorical structure level. Journal of
the Association for Information Science and Technol-
ogy, 66(5):905–917, 2015.

[69] Natali Ruchansky, Sungyong Seo, and Yan Liu. Csi:
A hybrid deep model for fake news. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.06959, 2017.

[70] Justin Sampson, Fred Morstatter, Liang Wu, and

[71] Chengcheng Shao, Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia,
Alessandro Flammini, and Filippo Menczer. Hoaxy:
A platform for tracking online misinformation. In
WWW’16.

[72] Baoxu Shi and Tim Weninger. Fact checking in het-
erogeneous information networks. In WWW’16.

[73] Kai Shu, Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Reza Zafarani,
and Huan Liu. User identity linkage across online so-
cial networks: A review. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
Newsletter, 18(2):5–17, 2017.

[74] Supasorn Suwajanakorn, Steven M Seitz, and Ira
Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. Synthesizing obama: learn-
ing lip sync from audio. ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics (TOG), 36(4):95, 2017.

[75] Eugenio Tacchini, Gabriele Ballarin, Marco L
Della Vedova, Stefano Moret, and Luca de Alfaro.
Some like it hoax: Automated fake news detection
in social networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.07506,
2017.

[76] Henri Tajfel and John C Turner. An integrative theory
of intergroup conﬂict. The social psychology of inter-
group relations, 33(47):74, 1979.

[77] Henri Tajfel and John C Turner. The social identity

theory of intergroup behavior. 2004.

[78] Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang,
Jun Yan, and Qiaozhu Mei. Line: Large-scale infor-
mation network embedding. In WWW’15.

[79] Jiliang Tang, Yi Chang, and Huan Liu. Mining social
media with social theories: a survey. ACM SIGKDD
Explorations Newsletter, 15(2):20–29, 2014.

[80] Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, Marc Stamminger,
Christian Theobalt, and Matthias Nießner. Face2face:
Real-time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos.
In CVPR’16.

[81] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Advances in
prospect theory: Cumulative representation of uncer-
tainty. Journal of Risk and uncertainty, 5(4):297–323,
1992.

[82] Udo Undeutsch. Beurteilung der glaubhaftigkeit von
aussagen. Handbuch der psychologie, 11:26–181, 1967.

[83] Andreas Vlachos and Sebastian Riedel. Fact checking:
Task deﬁnition and dataset construction. ACL’14.

[84] Aldert Vrij. Criteria-based content analysis: A quali-
tative review of the ﬁrst 37 studies. Psychology, Public
Policy, and Law, 11(1):3, 2005.

[85] Suhang Wang, Charu Aggarwal, Jiliang Tang, and
Huan Liu. Attributed signed network embedding. In
CIKM’17.

[86] Suhang Wang,

Jiliang Tang, Charu Aggarwal,
Yi Chang, and Huan Liu. Signed network embedding
in social media. In SDM’17.

[87] Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Charu Aggarwal, and
Huan Liu. Linked document embedding for classiﬁca-
tion. In CIKM’16.

[88] Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Fred Morstatter, and
Huan Liu. Paired restricted boltzmann machine for
linked data. In CIKM’16.

[96] Liang Wu, Jundong Li, Xia Hu, and Huan Liu. Glean-
ing wisdom from the past: Early detection of emerging
rumors in social media. In SDM’17.

[89] Suhang Wang, Yilin Wang, Jiliang Tang, Kai Shu,
Suhas Ranganath, and Huan Liu. What your images
reveal: Exploiting visual contents for point-of-interest
recommendation. In WWW’17.

[90] William Yang Wang. ” liar, liar pants on ﬁre”: A
new benchmark dataset for fake news detection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.00648, 2017.

[91] Yilin Wang, Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Huan Liu,
and Baoxin Li. Unsupervised sentiment analysis for
social media images. In IJCAI, pages 2378–2379, 2015.

[92] Andrew Ward, L Ross, E Reed, E Turiel, and
T Brown. Naive realism in everyday life: Implications
for social conﬂict and misunderstanding. Values and
knowledge, pages 103–135, 1997.

[93] Gerhard Weikum. What computers should know,
shouldn’t know, and shouldn’t believe. In WWW’17.

[94] L Wu, F Morstatter, X Hu, and H Liu. Chapter 5:

Mining misinformation in social media, 2016.

[95] Liang Wu, Xia Hu, Fred Morstatter, and Huan Liu.
Adaptive spammer detection with sparse group mod-
eling. In ICWSM’17.

[97] Liang Wu, Fred Morstatter, Xia Hu, and Huan Liu.
Mining misinformation in social media. Big Data in
Complex and Social Networks, pages 123–152, 2016.

[98] You Wu, Pankaj K Agarwal, Chengkai Li, Jun Yang,
and Cong Yu. Toward computational fact-checking.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 7(7):589–600,
2014.

[99] Fan Yang, Yang Liu, Xiaohui Yu, and Min Yang. Au-
tomatic detection of rumor on sina weibo. In Proceed-
ings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Mining Data
Semantics, page 13. ACM, 2012.

[100] Robert B Zajonc. Attitudinal eﬀects of mere exposure.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 9(2p2):1,
1968.

[101] Robert B Zajonc. Mere exposure: A gateway to the
subliminal. Current directions in psychological science,
10(6):224–228, 2001.

[102] Arkaitz Zubiaga, Ahmet Aker, Kalina Bontcheva,
Maria Liakata, and Rob Procter. Detection and res-
olution of rumours in social media: A survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.00656, 2017.

Fake News Detection on Social Media:
A Data Mining Perspective

Kai Shu†, Amy Sliva‡, Suhang Wang†, Jiliang Tang (cid:92), and Huan Liu†
†Computer Science & Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
‡Charles River Analytics, Cambridge, MA, USA
(cid:92)Computer Science & Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
†{kai.shu,suhang.wang,huan.liu}@asu.edu,
‡asliva@cra.com, (cid:92) tangjili@msu.edu

7
1
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
 
 
]
I
S
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
7
6
9
1
0
.
8
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Social media for news consumption is a double-edged sword.
On the one hand, its low cost, easy access, and rapid dissem-
ination of information lead people to seek out and consume
news from social media. On the other hand, it enables the
wide spread of “fake news”, i.e., low quality news with in-
tentionally false information. The extensive spread of fake
news has the potential for extremely negative impacts on
individuals and society. Therefore, fake news detection on
social media has recently become an emerging research that
is attracting tremendous attention. Fake news detection
on social media presents unique characteristics and chal-
lenges that make existing detection algorithms from tradi-
tional news media ineﬀective or not applicable. First, fake
news is intentionally written to mislead readers to believe
false information, which makes it diﬃcult and nontrivial to
detect based on news content; therefore, we need to include
auxiliary information, such as user social engagements on
social media, to help make a determination. Second, ex-
ploiting this auxiliary information is challenging in and of
itself as users’ social engagements with fake news produce
data that is big, incomplete, unstructured, and noisy. Be-
cause the issue of fake news detection on social media is both
challenging and relevant, we conducted this survey to fur-
ther facilitate research on the problem. In this survey, we
present a comprehensive review of detecting fake news on
social media, including fake news characterizations on psy-
chology and social theories, existing algorithms from a data
mining perspective, evaluation metrics and representative
datasets. We also discuss related research areas, open prob-
lems, and future research directions for fake news detection
on social media.

INTRODUCTION

1.
As an increasing amount of our lives is spent interacting
online through social media platforms, more and more peo-
ple tend to seek out and consume news from social media
rather than traditional news organizations. The reasons for
this change in consumption behaviors are inherent in the
nature of these social media platforms: (i) it is often more
timely and less expensive to consume news on social media
compared with traditional news media, such as newspapers
or television; and (ii) it is easier to further share, comment

on, and discuss the news with friends or other readers on
social media. For example, 62 percent of U.S. adults get
news on social media in 2016, while in 2012, only 49 per-
cent reported seeing news on social media1.
It was also
found that social media now outperforms television as the
major news source2. Despite the advantages provided by
social media, the quality of news on social media is lower
than traditional news organizations. However, because it
is cheap to provide news online and much faster and easier
to disseminate through social media, large volumes of fake
news, i.e., those news articles with intentionally false infor-
mation, are produced online for a variety of purposes, such
as ﬁnancial and political gain. It was estimated that over 1
million tweets are related to fake news “Pizzagate”3 by the
end of the presidential election. Given the prevalence of this
new phenomenon, “Fake news” was even named the word of
the year by the Macquarie dictionary in 2016.
The extensive spread of fake news can have a serious nega-
tive impact on individuals and society. First, fake news can
break the authenticity balance of the news ecosystem. For
example, it is evident that the most popular fake news was
even more widely spread on Facebook than the most pop-
ular authentic mainstream news during the U.S. 2016 pres-
ident election4. Second, fake news intentionally persuades
consumers to accept biased or false beliefs. Fake news is
usually manipulated by propagandists to convey political
messages or inﬂuence. For example, some report shows that
Russia has created fake accounts and social bots to spread
false stories5. Third, fake news changes the way people in-
terpret and respond to real news. For example, some fake
news was just created to trigger people’s distrust and make
them confused, impeding their abilities to diﬀerentiate what
is true from what is not6. To help mitigate the negative ef-
fects caused by fake news–both to beneﬁt the public and
the news ecosystem–It’s critical that we develop methods to
automatically detect fake news on social media.

1http://www.journalism.org/2016/05/26/news-use-across-
social-media-platforms-2016/
2http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-36528256
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pizzagate conspiracy theory
4https://www.buzzfeed.com/craigsilverman/viral-
fake-election-news-outperformed-real-news-on-
facebook?utm term=.nrg0WA1VP0#.gjJyKapW5y
5http://time.com/4783932/inside-russia-social-media-war-
america/
6https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/28/opinion/fake-
news-and-the-internet-shell-game.html? r=0

Detecting fake news on social media poses several new and
challenging research problems. Though fake news itself is
not a new problem–nations or groups have been using the
news media to execute propaganda or inﬂuence operations
for centuries–the rise of web-generated news on social me-
dia makes fake news a more powerful force that challenges
traditional journalistic norms. There are several character-
istics of this problem that make it uniquely challenging for
automated detection. First, fake news is intentionally writ-
ten to mislead readers, which makes it nontrivial to detect
simply based on news content. The content of fake news is
rather diverse in terms of topics, styles and media platforms,
and fake news attempts to distort truth with diverse lin-
guistic styles while simultaneously mocking true news. For
example, fake news may cite true evidence within the in-
correct context to support a non-factual claim [22]. Thus,
existing hand-crafted and data-speciﬁc textual features are
generally not suﬃcient for fake news detection. Other aux-
iliary information must also be applied to improve detec-
tion, such as knowledge base and user social engagements.
Second, exploiting this auxiliary information actually leads
to another critical challenge: the quality of the data itself.
Fake news is usually related to newly emerging, time-critical
events, which may not have been properly veriﬁed by exist-
ing knowledge bases due to the lack of corroborating ev-
idence or claims.
In addition, users’ social engagements
with fake news produce data that is big, incomplete, un-
structured, and noisy [79]. Eﬀective methods to diﬀerenti-
ate credible users, extract useful post features and exploit
network interactions are an open area of research and need
further investigations.
In this article, we present an overview of fake news detection
and discuss promising research directions. The key motiva-
tions of this survey are summarized as follows:

• Fake news on social media has been occurring for sev-
eral years; however, there is no agreed upon deﬁnition
of the term “fake news”. To better guide the future
directions of fake news detection research, appropriate
clariﬁcations are necessary.

• Social media has proved to be a powerful source for
fake news dissemination. There are some emerging
patterns that can be utilized for fake news detection
in social media. A review on existing fake news detec-
tion methods under various social media scenarios can
provide a basic understanding on the state-of-the-art
fake news detection methods.

• Fake news detection on social media is still in the early
age of development, and there are still many challeng-
ing issues that need further investigations. It is neces-
sary to discuss potential research directions that can
improve fake news detection and mitigation capabili-
ties.

To facilitate research in fake news detection on social me-
dia, in this survey we will review two aspects of the fake
news detection problem: characterization and detection. As
shown in Figure 1, we will ﬁrst describe the background of
the fake news detection problem using theories and prop-
erties from psychology and social studies; then we present
the detection approaches. Our major contributions of this
survey are summarized as follows:

• We discuss the narrow and broad deﬁnitions of fake
news that cover most existing deﬁnitions in the litera-
ture and further present the unique characteristics of
fake news on social media and its implications com-
pared with the traditional media;

• We give an overview of existing fake news detection
methods with a principled way to group representative
methods into diﬀerent categories; and

• We discuss several open issues and provide future di-

rections of fake news detection in social media.

The remainder of this survey is organized as follows.
In
Section 2, we present the deﬁnition of fake news and char-
acterize it by comparing diﬀerent theories and properties in
both traditional and social media. In Section 3, we continue
to formally deﬁne the fake news detection problem and sum-
marize the methods to detect fake news. In Section 4, we
discuss the datasets and evaluation metrics used by existing
methods. We brieﬂy introduce areas related to fake news de-
tection on social media in Section 5. Finally, we discuss the
open issues and future directions in Section 6 and conclude
this survey in Section 7.

2. FAKE NEWS CHARACTERIZATION
In this section, we introduce the basic social and psychologi-
cal theories related to fake news and discuss more advanced
patterns introduced by social media. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
discuss various deﬁnitions of fake news and diﬀerentiate re-
lated concepts that are usually misunderstood as fake news.
We then describe diﬀerent aspects of fake news on tradi-
tional media and the new patterns found on social media.

2.1 Deﬁnitions of Fake News
Fake news has existed for a very long time, nearly the same
amount of time as news began to circulate widely after the
printing press was invented in 14397. However, there is no
agreed deﬁnition of the term “fake news”. Therefore, we ﬁrst
discuss and compare some widely used deﬁnitions of fake
news in the existing literature, and provide our deﬁnition of
fake news that will be used for the remainder of this survey.
A narrow deﬁnition of fake news is news articles that are in-
tentionally and veriﬁably false and could mislead readers [2].
There are two key features of this deﬁnition: authenticity
and intent. First, fake news includes false information that
can be veriﬁed as such. Second, fake news is created with
dishonest intention to mislead consumers. This deﬁnition
has been widely adopted in recent studies [57; 17; 62; 41].
Broader deﬁnitions of fake news focus on the either authen-
ticity or intent of the news content. Some papers regard
satire news as fake news since the contents are false even
though satire is often entertainment-oriented and reveals its
own deceptiveness to the consumers [67; 4; 37; 9]. Other
literature directly treats deceptive news as fake news [66],
which includes serious fabrications, hoaxes, and satires.
In this article, we use the narrow deﬁnition of fake news.
Formally, we state this deﬁnition as follows,

Definition 1 (Fake News) Fake news is a news article
that is intentionally and veriﬁably false.

7http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/12/fake-
news-history-long-violent-214535

Figure 1: Fake news on social media: from characterization to detection.

The reasons for choosing this narrow deﬁnition are three-
folds. First, the underlying intent of fake news provides both
theoretical and practical value that enables a deeper under-
standing and analysis of this topic. Second, any techniques
for truth veriﬁcation that apply to the narrow conception
of fake news can also be applied to under the broader deﬁ-
nition. Third, this deﬁnition is able to eliminate the ambi-
guities between fake news and related concepts that are not
considered in this article. The following concepts are not
fake news according to our deﬁnition: (1) satire news with
proper context, which has no intent to mislead or deceive
consumers and is unlikely to be mis-perceived as factual;
(2) rumors that did not originate from news events; (3) con-
spiracy theories, which are diﬃcult verify as true or false;
(4) misinformation that is created unintentionally; and (5)
hoaxes that are only motivated by fun or to scam targeted
individuals.

2.2 Fake News on Traditional News Media
Fake news itself is not a new problem. The media ecology
of fake news has been changing over time from newsprint to
radio/television and, recently, online news and social media.
We denote “traditional fake news” as the fake news problem
before social media had important eﬀects on its production
and dissemination. Next, we will describe several psycholog-
ical and social science foundations that describe the impact
of fake news at both the individual and social information
ecosystem levels.

Psychological Foundations of Fake News. Humans are
naturally not very good at diﬀerentiating between real and
fake news. There are several psychological and cognitive
theories that can explain this phenomenon and the inﬂuen-
tial power of fake news. Traditional fake news mainly tar-
gets consumers by exploiting their individual vulnerabilities.
There are two major factors which make consumers natu-
rally vulnerable to fake news: (i) Na¨ıve Realism: consumers
tend to believe that their perceptions of reality are the only
accurate views, while others who disagree are regarded as
uninformed, irrational, or biased [92]; and (ii) Conﬁrmation
Bias: consumers prefer to receive information that conﬁrms
their existing views [58]. Due to these cognitive biases inher-
ent in human nature, fake news can often be perceived as real
by consumers. Moreover, once the misperception is formed,
it is very hard to correct it. Psychology studies shows that
correction of false information (e.g., fake news) by the pre-
sentation of true, factual information is not only unhelpful

to reduce misperceptions, but sometimes may even increase
the misperceptions, especially among ideological groups [59].

Social Foundations of the Fake News Ecosystem.
Considering the entire news consumption ecosystem, we can
also describe some of the social dynamics that contribute to
the proliferation of fake news. Prospect theory describes
decision making as a process by which people make choices
based on the relative gains and losses as compared to their
current state [39; 81]. This desire for maximizing the reward
of a decision applies to social gains as well, for instance,
continued acceptance by others in a user’s immediate social
network. As described by social identity theory [76; 77] and
normative inﬂuence theory [3; 40], this preference for social
acceptance and aﬃrmation is essential to a person’s identity
and self-esteem, making users likely to choose “socially safe”
options when consuming and disseminating news informa-
tion, following the norms established in the community even
if the news being shared is fake news.
This rational theory of fake news interactions can be mod-
eled from an economic game theoretical perspective [26] by
formulating the news generation and consumption cycle as a
two-player strategy game. For explaining fake news, we as-
sume there are two kinds of key players in the information
ecosystem: publisher and consumer. The process of news
publishing is modeled as a mapping from original signal s
to resultant news report a with an eﬀect of distortion bias
b, i.e., s b−→ a, where b = [−1, 0, 1] indicates [lef t, no, right]
biases take eﬀects on news publishing process. Intuitively,
this is capturing the degree to which a news article may be
biased or distorted to produce fake news. The utility for
the publisher stems from two perspectives: (i) short-term
utility: the incentive to maximize proﬁt, which is positively
correlated with the number of consumers reached; (ii) long-
term utility: their reputation in terms of news authenticity.
Utility of consumers consists of two parts: (i) information
utility: obtaining true and unbiased information (usually ex-
tra investment cost needed); (ii) psychology utility: receiving
news that satisﬁes their prior opinions and social needs, e.g.,
conﬁrmation bias and prospect theory. Both publisher and
consumer try to maximize their overall utilities in this strat-
egy game of the news consumption process. We can capture
the fact that fake news happens when the short-term utility
dominates a publisher’s overall utility and psychology utility
dominates the consumer’s overall utility, and an equilibrium
is maintained. This explains the social dynamics that lead
to an information ecosystem where fake news can thrive.

2.3 Fake News on Social Media
In this subsection, we will discuss some unique character-
istics of fake news on social media. Speciﬁcally, we will
highlight the key features of fake news that are enabled by
social media. Note that the aforementioned characteristics
of traditional fake news are also applicable to social media.

Malicious Accounts on Social Media for Propaganda.
While many users on social media are legitimate, social me-
dia users may also be malicious, and in some cases are not
even real humans. The low cost of creating social media
accounts also encourages malicious user accounts, such as
social bots, cyborg users, and trolls. A social bot refers to
a social media account that is controlled by a computer al-
gorithm to automatically produce content and interact with
humans (or other bot users) on social media [23]. Social bots
can become malicious entities designed speciﬁcally with the
purpose to do harm, such as manipulating and spreading
fake news on social media. Studies shows that social bots
distorted the 2016 U.S. presidential election online discus-
sions on a large scale [6], and that around 19 million bot
accounts tweeted in support of either Trump or Clinton in
the week leading up to election day8. Trolls, real human
users who aim to disrupt online communities and provoke
consumers into an emotional response, are also playing an
important role in spreading fake news on social media. For
example, evidence suggests that there were 1,000 paid Rus-
sian trolls spreading fake news on Hillary Clinton9. Trolling
behaviors are highly aﬀected by people’s mood and the con-
text of online discussions, which enables the easy dissemi-
nation of fake news among otherwise “normal” online com-
munities [14]. The eﬀect of trolling is to trigger people’s
inner negative emotions, such as anger and fear, resulting
in doubt, distrust, and irrational behavior. Finally, cyborg
users can spread fake news in a way that blends automated
activities with human input. Usually cyborg accounts are
registered by human as a camouﬂage and set automated pro-
grams to perform activities in social media. The easy switch
of functionalities between human and bot oﬀers cyborg users
unique opportunities to spread fake news [15]. In a nutshell,
these highly active and partisan malicious accounts on so-
cial media become the powerful sources and proliferation of
fake news.

Echo Chamber Eﬀect. Social media provides a new paradigm
of information creation and consumption for users. The
information seeking and consumption process are chang-
ing from a mediated form (e.g., by journalists) to a more
disinter-mediated way [19]. Consumers are selectively ex-
posed to certain kinds of news because of the way news
feed appear on their homepage in social media, amplifying
the psychological challenges to dispelling fake news identi-
ﬁed above. For example, users on Facebook always follow
like-minded people and thus receive news that promote their
favored existing narratives [65]. Therefore, users on social
media tend to form groups containing like-minded people
where they then polarize their opinions, resulting in an echo
chamber eﬀect. The echo chamber eﬀect facilitates the pro-

8http://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/2016/11/18/resource-for-
understanding-political-bots/
9http://www.huﬃngtonpost.com/entry/russian-trolls-fake-
news us 58dde6bae4b08194e3b8d5c4

cess by which people consume and believe fake news due to
the following psychological factors [60]: (1) social credibility,
which means people are more likely to perceive a source as
credible if others perceive the source is credible, especially
when there is not enough information available to access the
truthfulness of the source; and (2) frequency heuristic, which
means that consumers may naturally favor information they
hear frequently, even if it is fake news. Studies have shown
that increased exposure to an idea is enough to generate a
positive opinion of it [100; 101], and in echo chambers, users
continue to share and consume the same information. As a
result, this echo chamber eﬀect creates segmented, homoge-
neous communities with a very limited information ecosys-
tem. Research shows that the homogeneous communities
become the primary driver of information diﬀusion that fur-
ther strengthens polarization [18].

3. FAKE NEWS DETECTION
In the previous section, we introduced the conceptual char-
acterization of traditional fake news and fake news in so-
cial media. Based on this characterization, we further ex-
plore the problem deﬁnition and proposed approaches for
fake news detection.

3.1 Problem Deﬁnition
In this subsection, we present the details of mathematical
formulation of fake news detection on social media. Specif-
ically, we will introduce the deﬁnition of key components
of fake news and then present the formal deﬁnition of fake
news detection. The basic notations are deﬁned below,

• Let a refer to a News Article. It consists of two ma-
jor components: Publisher and Content. Publisher (cid:126)pa
includes a set of proﬁle features to describe the origi-
nal author, such as name, domain, age, among other
attributes. Content (cid:126)ca consists of a set of attributes
that represent the news article and includes headline,
text, image, etc.

• We also deﬁne Social News Engagements as a set of
tuples E = {eit} to represent the process of how news
spread over time among n users U = {u1, u2, ..., un}
and their corresponding posts P = {p1, p2, ..., pn} on
social media regarding news article a. Each engage-
ment eit = {ui, pi, t} represents that a user ui spreads
news article a using pi at time t. Note that we set
t = N ull if the article a does not have any engage-
ment yet and thus ui represents the publisher.

Definition 2 (Fake News Detection) Given the social
news engagements E among n users for news article a, the
task of fake news detection is to predict whether the news
article a is a fake news piece or not, i.e., F : E → {0, 1}
such that,

F(a) =

(cid:40)

1,
0, otherwise.

if a is a piece of fake news,

(1)

where F is the prediction function we want to learn.
Note that we deﬁne fake news detection as a binary classiﬁ-
cation problem for the following reason: fake news is essen-
tially a distortion bias on information manipulated by the
publisher. According to previous research about media bias

theory [26], distortion bias is usually modeled as a binary
classiﬁcation problem.
Next, we propose a general data mining framework for fake
news detection which includes two phases: (i) feature ex-
traction and (ii) model construction. The feature extraction
phase aims to represent news content and related auxiliary
information in a formal mathematical structure, and model
construction phase further builds machine learning models
to better diﬀerentiate fake news and real news based on the
feature representations.

3.2 Feature Extraction
Fake news detection on traditional news media mainly relies
on news content, while in social media, extra social context
auxiliary information can be used to as additional informa-
tion to help detect fake news. Thus, we will present the
details of how to extract and represent useful features from
news content and social context.

3.2.1 News Content Features
News content features (cid:126)ca describe the meta information re-
lated to a piece of news. A list of representative news content
attributes are listed below:

• Source: Author or publisher of the news article

• Headline: Short title text that aims to catch the at-
tention of readers and describes the main topic of the
article

• Body Text: Main text that elaborates the details of
the news story; there is usually a major claim that is
speciﬁcally highlighted and that shapes the angle of
the publisher

• Image/Video: Part of the body content of a news
article that provides visual cues to frame the story

Based on these raw content attributes, diﬀerent kinds of
feature representations can be built to extract discriminative
characteristics of fake news. Typically, the news content we
are looking at will mostly be linguistic-based and visual-
based, described in more detail below.

Linguistic-based: Since fake news pieces are intention-
ally created for ﬁnancial or political gain rather than to re-
port objective claims, they often contain opinionated and
inﬂammatory language, crafted as “clickbait” (i.e., to en-
tice users to click on the link to read the full article) or
to incite confusion [13]. Thus, it is reasonable to exploit
linguistic features that capture the diﬀerent writing styles
and sensational headlines to detect fake news. Linguistic-
based features are extracted from the text content in terms
of document organizations from diﬀerent levels, such as char-
acters, words, sentences, and documents. In order to cap-
ture the diﬀerent aspects of fake news and real news, ex-
isting work utilized both common linguistic features and
domain-speciﬁc linguistic features. Common linguistic fea-
tures are often used to represent documents for various tasks
in natural language processing. Typical common linguis-
including character-
tic features are:
level and word-level features, such as total words, charac-
ters per word, frequency of large words, and unique words;
(ii) syntactic features, including sentence-level features, such

(i) lexical features,

as frequency of function words and phrases (i.e., “n-grams”
and bag-of-words approaches [24]) or punctuation and parts-
of-speech (POS) tagging. Domain-speciﬁc linguistic fea-
tures, which are speciﬁcally aligned to news domain, such
as quoted words, external links, number of graphs, and the
average length of graphs, etc [62]. Moreover, other features
can be speciﬁcally designed to capture the deceptive cues
in writing styles to diﬀerentiate fake news, such as lying-
detection features [1].

Visual-based: Visual cues have been shown to be an im-
portant manipulator for fake news propaganda10. As we
have characterized, fake news exploits the individual vulner-
abilities of people and thus often relies on sensational or even
fake images to provoke anger or other emotional response of
consumers. Visual-based features are extracted from visual
images and videos) to capture the diﬀerent
elements (e.g.
characteristics for fake news. Faking images were identiﬁed
based on various user-level and tweet-level hand-crafted fea-
tures using classiﬁcation framework [28]. Recently, various
visual and statistical features has been extracted for news
veriﬁcation [38]. Visual features include clarity score, coher-
ence score, similarity distribution histogram, diversity score,
and clustering score. Statistical features include count, im-
age ratio, multi-image ratio, hot image ratio, long image
ratio, etc.

Social Context Features

3.2.2
In addition to features related directly to the content of
the news articles, additional social context features can also
be derived from the user-driven social engagements of news
consumption on social media platform. Social engagements
represent the news proliferation process over time, which
provides useful auxiliary information to infer the veracity of
news articles. Note that few papers exist in the literature
that detect fake news using social context features. How-
ever, because we believe this is a critical aspect of successful
fake news detection, we introduce a set of common features
utilized in similar research areas, such as rumor veracity
classiﬁcation on social media. Generally, there are three
major aspects of the social media context that we want to
represent: users, generated posts, and networks. Below, we
investigate how we can extract and represent social context
features from these three aspects to support fake news de-
tection.

User-based: As we mentioned in Section 2.3, fake news
pieces are likely to be created and spread by non-human
accounts, such as social bots or cyborgs. Thus, capturing
users’ proﬁles and characteristics by user-based features can
provide useful information for fake news detection. User-
based features represent the characteristics of those users
who have interactions with the news on social media. These
features can be categorized across diﬀerent levels: individual
level and group level. Individual level features are extracted
to infer the credibility and reliability for each user using
various aspects of user demographics, such as registration
age, number of followers/followees, number of tweets the
user has authored, etc [11]. Group level user features cap-
ture overall characteristics of groups of users related to the
news [99]. The assumption is that the spreaders of fake news

10https://www.wired.com/2016/12/photos-fuel-spread-fake-
news/

and real news may form diﬀerent communities with unique
characteristics that can be depicted by group level features.
Commonly used group level features come from aggregat-
ing (e.g., averaging and weighting) individual level features,
such as ‘percentage of veriﬁed users’ and ‘average number
of followers’ [49; 42].

are properly built, existing network metrics can be applied
as feature representations. For example, degree and cluster-
ing coeﬃcient have been used to characterize the diﬀusion
network [42] and friendship network [42]. Other approaches
learn the latent node embedding features by using SVD [69]
or network propagation algorithms [37].

Post-based: People express their emotions or opinions to-
wards fake news through social media posts, such as skep-
tical opinions, sensational reactions, etc. Thus, it is rea-
sonable to extract post-based features to help ﬁnd potential
fake news via reactions from the general public as expressed
in posts. Post-based features focus on identifying useful in-
formation to infer the veracity of news from various aspects
of relevant social media posts. These features can be cat-
egorized as post level, group level, and temporal level. Post
level features generate feature values for each post. The
aforementioned linguistic-based features and some embed-
ding approaches [69] for news content can also be applied
for each post. Speciﬁcally, there are unique features for
posts that represent the social response from general pub-
lic, such as stance, topic, and credibility. Stance features (or
viewpoints) indicate the users’ opinions towards the news,
such as supporting, denying, etc [37]. Topic features can be
extracted using topic models, such as latent Dirichlet allo-
cation (LDA) [49]. Credibility features for posts assess the
degree of reliability [11]. Group level features aim to ag-
gregate the feature values for all relevant posts for speciﬁc
news articles by using “wisdom of crowds”. For example,
the average credibility scores are used to evaluate the credi-
bility of news [37]. A more comprehensive list of group-level
post features can also be found in [11]. Temporal level fea-
tures consider the temporal variations of post level feature
values [49]. Unsupervised embedding methods, such as re-
current neural network (RNN), are utilized to capture the
changes in posts over time [69; 48]. Based on the shape of
this time series for various metrics of relevant posts (e.g,
number of posts), mathematical features can be computed,
such as SpikeM parameters [42].

Network-based: Users form diﬀerent networks on social
media in terms of interests, topics, and relations. As men-
tioned before, fake news dissemination processes tend to
form an echo chamber cycle, highlighting the value of ex-
tracting network-based features to represent these types of
network patterns for fake news detection. Network-based
features are extracted via constructing speciﬁc networks among
the users who published related social media posts. Diﬀerent
types of networks can be constructed. The stance network
can be built with nodes indicating all the tweets relevant
to the news and the edge indicating the weights of similar-
ity of stances [37; 75]. Another type of network is the co-
occurrence network, which is built based on the user engage-
ments by counting whether those users write posts relevant
to the same news articles [69]. In addition, the friendship
network indicates the following/followee structure of users
who post related tweets [42]. An extension of this friendship
network is the diﬀusion network, which tracks the trajectory
of the spread of news [42], where nodes represent the users
and edges represent the information diﬀusion paths among
them. That is, a diﬀusion path between two users ui and uj
exists if and only if (1) uj follows ui, and (2) uj posts about
a given news only after ui does so. After these networks

3.3 Model Construction
In the previous section, we introduced features extracted
from diﬀerent sources, i.e., news content and social con-
text, for fake news detection. In this section, we discuss the
details of the model construction process for several exist-
ing approaches. Speciﬁcally we categorize existing methods
based on their main input sources as: News Content Models
and Social Context Models.

3.3.1 News Content Models
In this subsection, we focus on news content models, which
mainly rely on news content features and existing factual
sources to classify fake news. Speciﬁcally, existing approaches
can be categorized as Knowledge-based and Style-based.

Knowledge-based: Since fake news attempts to spread
false claims in news content, the most straightforward means
of detecting it is to check the truthfulness of major claims
in a news article to decide the news veracity. Knowledge-
based approaches aim to use external sources to fact-check
proposed claims in news content. The goal of fact-checking is
to assign a truth value to a claim in a particular context [83].
Fact-checking has attracted increasing attention, and many
eﬀorts have been made to develop a feasible automated fact-
checking system. Existing fact-checking approaches can be
categorized as expert-oriented, crowdsourcing-oriented, and
computational-oriented.

• Expert-oriented fact-checking heavily relies on human
domain experts to investigate relevant data and doc-
uments to construct the verdicts of claim veracity, for
example PolitiFact11, Snopes12, etc. However, expert-
oriented fact-checking is an intellectually demanding
and time-consuming process, which limits the poten-
tial for high eﬃciency and scalability.

• Crowdsourcing-oriented fact-checking exploits the “wis-
dom of crowd” to enable normal people to annotate
news content; these annotations are then aggregated
to produce an overall assessment of the news verac-
ity. For example, Fiskkit13 allows users to discuss and
annotate the accuracy of speciﬁc parts of a news arti-
cle. As another example, an anti-fake news bot named
“For real” is a public account in the instant communi-
cation mobile application LINE14, which allows people
to report suspicious news content which is then further
checked by editors.

• Computational-oriented fact-checking aims to provide
an automatic scalable system to classify true and false
claims. Previous computational-oriented fact checking
methods try to solve two majors issues: (i) identifying

11http://www.politifact.com/
12http://www.snopes.com/
13http://ﬁskkit.com
14https://grants.g0v.tw/projects/588fa7b382223f001e022944

check-worthy claims and (ii) discriminating the verac-
ity of fact claims. To identify check-worthy claims, fac-
tual claims in news content are extracted that convey
key statements and viewpoints, facilitating the subse-
quent fact-checking process [31]. Fact-checking for spe-
ciﬁc claims largely relies on external resources to deter-
mine the truthfulness of a particular claim. Two typ-
ical external sources include the open web and struc-
tured knowledge graph. Open web sources are utilized
as references that can be compared with given claims
in terms of both the consistency and frequency [5; 50].
Knowledge graphs are integrated from the linked open
data as a structured network topology, such as DB-
pedia and Google Relation Extraction Corpus. Fact-
checking using a knowledge graph aims to check whether
the claims in news content can be inferred from exist-
ing facts in the knowledge graph [98; 16; 72].

Style-based: Fake news publishers often have malicious
intent to spread distorted and misleading information and
inﬂuence large communities of consumers, requiring partic-
ular writing styles necessary to appeal to and persuade a
wide scope of consumers that is not seen in true news ar-
ticles. Style-based approaches try to detect fake news by
capturing the manipulators in the writing style of news con-
tent. There are mainly two typical categories of style-based
methods: Deception-oriented and Objectivity-oriented.

• Deception-oriented stylometric methods capture the
deceptive statements or claims from news content. The
motivation of deception detection originates from foren-
sic psychology (i.e., Undeutsch Hypothesis) [82] and
various forensic tools including Criteria-based Content
Analysis [84] and Scientiﬁc-based Content Analysis [45]
have been developed. More recently, advanced natu-
ral language processing models are applied to spot de-
ception phases from the following perspectives: Deep
syntax and Rhetorical structure. Deep syntax models
have been implemented using probabilistic context fr-
ree grammers (PCFG), with which sentences can be
transformed into rules that describe the syntax struc-
ture. Based on the PCFG, diﬀerent rules can be de-
veloped for deception detection, such as unlexicalized/
lexicalized production rules and grandparent rules [22].
Rhetorical structure theory can be utilized to capture
the diﬀerences between deceptive and truthful sen-
tences [68]. Deep network models, such as convolu-
tional neural networks (CNN), have also been applied
to classify fake news veracity [90].

• Objectivity-oriented approaches capture style signals
that can indicate a decreased objectivity of news con-
tent and thus the potential to mislead consumers, such
as hyperpartisan styles and yellow-journalism. Hyper-
partisan styles represent extreme behavior in favor of a
particular political party, which often correlates with
a strong motivation to create fake news. Linguistic-
based features can be applied to detect hyperpartisan
articles [62]. Yellow-journalism represents those ar-
ticles that do not contain well-researched news, but
instead rely on eye-catching headlines (i.e., clickbait)
with a propensity for exaggeration, sensationalization,
scare-mongering, etc. Often, news titles will summa-
rize the major viewpoints of the article that the author

wants to convey, and thus misleading and deceptive
clickbait titles can serve as a good indicator for recog-
nizing fake news articles [13].

Social Context Models

3.3.2
The nature of social media provides researchers with ad-
ditional resources to supplement and enhance News Con-
tent Models. Social context models include relevant user
social engagements in the analysis, capturing this auxiliary
information from a variety of perspectives. We can clas-
sify existing approaches for social context modeling into two
categories: Stance-based and Propagation-based. Note that
very few existing fake news detection approaches have uti-
lized social context models. Thus, we also introduce similar
methods for rumor detection using social media, which have
potential application for fake news detection.

Stance-based: Stance-based approaches utilize users’ view-
points from relevant post contents to infer the veracity of
original news articles. The stance of users’ posts can be
represented either explicitly or implicitly. Explicit stances
are direct expressions of emotion or opinion, such as the
“thumbs up” and “thumbs down” reactions expressed in
Facebook. Implicit stances can be automatically extracted
from social media posts. Stance detection is the task of
automatically determining from a post whether the user is
in favor of, neutral toward, or against some target entity,
event, or idea [53]. Previous stance classiﬁcation methods
mainly rely on hand-crafted linguistic or embedding features
on individual posts to predict stances [53; 64]. Topic model
methods, such as latent dirichlet allocation (LDA) can be
applied to learn latent stance from topics [37]. Using these
methods, we can infer the news veracity based on the stance
values of relevant posts. Tacchini et al. proposed to con-
struct a bipartite network of user and Facebook posts using
the “like” stance information [75]; based on this network,
a semi-supervised probabilistic model was used to predict
the likelihood of Facebook posts being hoaxes. Jin et al.
explored topic models to learn latent viewpoint values and
further exploited these viewpoints to learn the credibility of
relevant posts and news content [37].

Propagation-based: Propagation-based approaches for fake
news detection reason about the interrelations of relevant
social media posts to predict news credibility. The basic
assumption is that the credibility of a news event is highly
related to the credibilities of relevant social media posts.
Both homogeneous and heterogeneous credibility networks
can be built for propagation process. Homogeneous credi-
bility networks consist of a single type of entities, such as
post or event [37]. Heterogeneous credibility networks in-
volve diﬀerent types of entities, such as posts, sub-events,
and events [36; 29]. Gupta et al. proposed a PageRank-like
credibility propagation algorithm by encoding users’ credi-
bilities and tweets’ implications on a three layer user-tweet-
event heterogeneous information network. Jin et al. pro-
posed to include news aspects (i.e., latent sub-events), build
a three-layer hierarchical network, and utilize a graph op-
timization framework to infer event credibilities. Recently,
the conﬂicting viewpoint relationships are included to build
a homogeneous credibility network among tweets and guide
the process to evaluate their credibilities [37].

4. ASSESSING DETECTION EFFICACY
In this section, we discuss how to assess the performance of
algorithms for fake news detection. We focus on the avail-
able datasets and evaluation metrics for this task.

4.1 Datasets
Online news can be collected from diﬀerent sources, such
as news agency homepages, search engines, and social me-
dia websites. However, manually determining the verac-
ity of news is a challenging task, usually requiring annota-
tors with domain expertise who performs careful analysis of
claims and additional evidence, context, and reports from
authoritative sources. Generally, news data with annota-
tions can be gathered in the following ways: Expert journal-
ists, Fact-checking websites, Industry detectors, and Crowd-
sourced workers. However, there are no agreed upon bench-
mark datasets for the fake news detection problem. Some
publicly available datasets are listed below:

• BuzzFeedNews 15: This dataset comprises a complete
sample of news published in Facebook from 9 news
agencies over a week close to the 2016 U.S. election
from September 19 to 23 and September 26 and 27.
Every post and the linked article were fact-checked
claim-by-claim by 5 BuzzFeed journalists. This dataset
is further enriched in [62] by adding the linked articles,
It contains
attached media, and relevant metadata.
1,627 articles–826 mainstream, 356 left-wing, and 545
right-wing articles.

• LIAR16: This dataset is collected from fact-checking
It includes
website PolitiFact through its API [90].
12,836 human-labeled short statements, which are sam-
pled from various contexts, such as news releases, TV
or radio interviews, campaign speeches, etc. The labels
for news truthfulness are ﬁne-grained multiple classes:
pants-ﬁre, false, barely-true, half-true, mostly true,
and true.

• BS Detector 17: This dataset is collected from a browser
extension called BS detector developed for checking
news veracity18. It searches all links on a given web-
page for references to unreliable sources by checking
against a manually complied list of domains. The la-
bels are the outputs of BS detector, rather than human
annotators.

• CREDBANK 19: This is a large scale crowdsourced
dataset of approximately 60 million tweets that cover
96 days starting from October 2015. All the tweets are
broken down to be related to over 1,000 news events,
with each event assessed for credibilities by 30 anno-
tators from Amazon Mechanical Turk [52].

these datasets also have speciﬁc limitation that make them
challenging to use for fake news detection. BuzzFeedNews
only contains headlines and text for each news piece and
covers news articles from very few news agencies. LIAR in-
cludes mostly short statements, rather than the entire news
content. Further, these statements are collected from vari-
ous speakers, rather than news publishers, and may include
some claims that are not fake news. BS Detector data is
collected and annotated by using a developed news veracity
checking tool. As the labels have not been properly vali-
dated by human experts, any model trained on this data is
really learning the parameters of BS Detector, rather than
expert-annotated ground truth fake news. Finally, CRED-
BANK was originally collected for tweet credibility assess-
ment, so the tweets in this dataset are not really the social
engagements for speciﬁc news articles.
To address the disadvantages of existing fake news detec-
tion datasets, we have an ongoing project to develop a us-
able dataset for fake news detection on social media. This
dataset, called F akeN ewsN et20, includes all mentioned news
content and social context features with reliable ground truth
fake news labels.

4.2 Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the performance of algorithms for fake news de-
tection problem, various evaluation metrics have been used.
In this subsection, we review the most widely used metrics
for fake news detection. Most existing approaches consider
the fake news problem as a classiﬁcation problem that pre-
dicts whether a news article is fake or not:

• True Positive (TP): when predicted fake news pieces

are actually annotated as fake news;

• True Negative (TN): when predicted true news pieces

are actually annotated as true news;

• False Negative (FN): when predicted true news pieces

are actually annotated as fake news;

• False Positive (FP): when predicted fake news pieces

are actually annotated as true news.

By formulating this as a classiﬁcation problem, we can deﬁne
following metrics,

P recision =

Recall =

|T P |
|T P | + |F P |
|T P |
|T P | + |F N |

F 1 = 2 ·

P recision · Recall
P recision + Recall

Accuracy =

|T P | + |T N |
|T P | + |T N | + |F P | + |F N |

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

In Table 1, we compare these public fake news detection
datasets, highlighting the features that can be extracted
from each dataset. We can see that no existing public dataset
In addition,
can provide all possible features of interest.

15https://github.com/BuzzFeedNews/2016-10-facebook-
fact-check/tree/master/data
16https://www.cs.ucsb.edu/ william/data/liar dataset.zip
17https://www.kaggle.com/mrisdal/fake-news
18https://github.com/bs-detector/bs-detector
19http://compsocial.github.io/CREDBANK-data/

These metrics are commonly used in the machine learning
community and enable us to evaluate the performance of a
classiﬁer from diﬀerent perspectives. Speciﬁcally, accuracy
measures the similarity between predicted fake news and real
fake news. Precision measures the fraction of all detected
fake news that are annotated as fake news, addressing the
important problem of identifying which news is fake. How-
ever, because fake news datasets are often skewed, a high
precision can be easily achieved by making fewer positive

20https://github.com/KaiDMML/FakeNewsNet

Table 1: Comparison of Fake News Detection Datasets.

Features

News Content

Social Context

Dataset

Linguistic Visual User Post Network

BuzzFeedNews

LIAR

BS Detector

CREDBANK

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

predictions. Thus, recall is used to measure the sensitivity,
or the fraction of annotated fake news articles that are pre-
dicted to be fake news. F1 is used to combine precision and
recall, which can provide an overall prediction performance
for fake news detection. Note that for P recision, Recall,
F1, and Accuracy, the higher the value, the better the per-
formance.
The Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve pro-
vides a way of comparing the performance of classiﬁers by
looking at the trade-oﬀ in the False Positive Rate (FPR) and
the True Positive Rate (TPR). To draw the ROC curve, we
plot the FPR on the x axis and and TPR along the y axis.
The ROC curve compares the performance of diﬀerent clas-
siﬁers by changing class distributions via a threshold. TPR
and FPR are deﬁned as follows (note that TPR is the same
as recall deﬁned above):

T P R =

F P R =

|T P |
|T P | + |F N |
|F P |
|F P | + |T N |

(6)

(7)

Based on the ROC curve, we can compute the Area Under
the Curve (AUC) value, which measures the overall perfor-
mance of how likely the classiﬁer is to rank the fake news
higher than any true news. Based on [30], AUC is deﬁned
as below.

AU C =

(cid:80)(n0 + n1 + 1 − ri) − n0(n0 + 1)/2
n0n1

(8)

where ri is the rank of ith fake news piece and n0 (n1) is
It is worth men-
the number of fake (true) news pieces.
tioning that AUC is more statistically consistent and more
discriminating than accuracy [47], and it is usually applied
in an imbalanced classiﬁcation problem, such as fake news
classiﬁcation, where the number of ground truth fake news
articles and and true news articles have a very imbalanced
distribution.

5. RELATED AREAS
In this section, we further discuss areas that are related to
the problem of fake news detection. We aim to point out
the diﬀerences between these areas and fake news detection
by brieﬂy explaining the task goals and highlighting some
popular methods.

5.1 Rumor Classiﬁcation
A rumor can usually be deﬁned as “a piece of circulating
information whose veracity status is yet to be veriﬁed at
the time of spreading” [102]. The function of a rumor is
to make sense of an ambiguous situation, and the truthful-
ness value could be true, false or unveriﬁed. Previous ap-
proaches for rumor analysis focus on four subtasks: rumor

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

detection, rumor tracking, stance classiﬁcation, and verac-
ity classiﬁcation [102]. Speciﬁcally, rumor detection aims to
classify a piece of information as rumor or non-rumor [96;
70]; rumor tracking aims to collect and ﬁlter posts discussing
speciﬁc rumors; rumor stance classiﬁcation determines how
each relevant post is oriented with respect to the rumor’s
veracity; veracity classiﬁcation attempts to predict the ac-
tual truth value of the rumor. The most related task to fake
news detection is the rumor veracity classiﬁcation. Rumor
veracity classiﬁcation relies heavily on the other subtasks,
requiring the stances or opinions can be extracted from rel-
evant posts. These posts are considered as important sen-
sors for determining the veracity of the rumor. Diﬀerent
from rumors, which may include long-term rumors, such as
conspiracy theories, as well as short-term emerging rumors,
fake news refers to information related speciﬁcally to public
news events that can be veriﬁed as false.

5.2 Truth Discovery
Truth discovery is the problem of detecting true facts from
multiple conﬂicting sources [46]. Truth discovery methods
do not explore the fact claims directly, but rely on a collec-
tion of contradicting sources that record the properties of
objects to determine the truth value. Truth discovery aims
to determine the source credibility and object truthfulness
at the same time. The fake news detection problem can
beneﬁt from various aspects of truth discovery approaches
under diﬀerent scenarios. First, the credibility of diﬀerent
news outlets can be modeled to infer the truthfulness of re-
ported news. Second, relevant social media posts can also
be modeled as social response sources to better determine
the truthfulness of claims [56; 93]. However, there are some
other issues that must be considered to apply truth discovery
to fake news detection in social media scenarios. First, most
existing truth discovery methods focus on handling struc-
tured input in the form of Subject-Predicate-Object (SPO)
tuples, while social media data is highly unstructured and
noisy. Second, truth discovery methods can not be well ap-
plied when a fake news article is newly launched and pub-
lished by only a few news outlets because at that point there
is not enough social media posts relevant to it to serve as
additional sources.

5.3 Clickbait Detection
Clickbait is a term commonly used to describe eye-catching
and teaser headlines in online media. Clickbait headlines
create a so-called “curiosity gap”, increasing the likelihood
that reader will click the target link to satisfy their curios-
ity. Existing clickbait detection approaches utilize various
linguistic features extracted from teaser messages, linked
webpages, and tweet meta information [12; 8; 63]. Diﬀer-
ent types of clickbait are categorized, and some of them are
highly correlated with non-factual claims [7]. The underly-

ing motivation of clickbait is usually for click-through rates
and the resultant advertising revenue. Thus, the body text
of clickbait articles are often informally organized and poorly
reasoned. This discrepancy has been used by researchers to
identify the inconsistency between headlines and news con-
tents in an attempt to detect fake news articles21. Even
though not all fake news may include clickbait headlines,
speciﬁc clickbait headlines could serve as an important in-
dicator, and various features can be utilized to help detect
fake news.

5.4 Spammer and Bot Detection
Spammer detection on social media, which aims to cap-
ture malicious users that coordinate among themselves to
launch various attacks, such as spreading ads, disseminat-
ing pornography, delivering viruses, and phishing [44], has
recently attracted wide attention. Existing approaches for
social spammer detection mainly rely on extracting features
from user activities and social network information [35; 95;
33; 34]. In addition, the rise of social bots has also increased
the circulation of false information as they automatically
retweet posts without verifying the facts [23]. The major
challenge brought by social bots is that they can give a false
impression that information is highly popular and endorsed
by many people, which enables the echo chamber eﬀect for
the propagation of fake news. Previous approaches for bot
detection are based on social network information, crowd-
sourcing, and discriminative features [23; 55; 54]. Thus,
both spammer and social bots could provide insights about
target speciﬁc malicious social media accounts that can be
used for fake news detection.

6. OPEN ISSUES AND FUTURE RESEARCH
In this section, we present some open issues in fake news
detection and future research directions. Fake news detec-
tion on social media is a newly emerging research area, so
we aim to point out promising research directions from a
data mining perspective. Speciﬁcally, as shown in Figure 2,
we outline the research directions in four categories: Data-
oriented, Feature-oriented, Model-oriented and Application-
oriented.

Data-oriented: Data-oriented fake news research is fo-
cusing on diﬀerent kinds of data characteristics, such as :
dataset, temporal and psychological. From a dataset per-
spective, we demonstrated that there is no existing bench-
mark dataset that includes resources to extract all relevant
features. A promising direction is to create a comprehensive
and large-scale fake news benchmark dataset, which can be
used by researchers to facilitate further research in this area.
From a temporal perspective, fake news dissemination on so-
cial media demonstrates unique temporal patterns diﬀerent
from true news. Along this line, one interesting problem
is to perform early fake news detection, which aims to give
early alerts of fake news during the dissemination process.
For example, this approach could look at only social media
posts within some time delay of the original post as sources
for news veriﬁcation [37]. Detecting fake news early can help
prevent further propagation on social media. From a psycho-
logical perspective, diﬀerent aspects of fake news have been
qualitatively explored in the social psychology literature [92;

21http://www.fakenewschallenge.org/

58; 59], but quantitative studies to verify these psychological
factors are rather limited. For example, the echo chamber
eﬀect plays an important role for fake news spreading in so-
cial media. Then how to capture echo chamber eﬀects and
how to utilize the pattern for fake news detection in social
media could be an interesting investigation. Moreover, in-
tention detection from news data is promising but limited
as most existing fake news research focus on detecting the
authenticity but ignore the intent aspect of fake news. In-
tention detection is very challenging as the intention is often
explicitly unavailable. Thus.
it’s worth to explore how to
use data mining methods to validate and capture psychol-
ogy intentions.

Feature-oriented: Feature-oriented fake news research aims
to determine eﬀective features for detecting fake news from
multiple data sources. We have demonstrated that there are
two major data sources: news content and social context.
From a news content perspective, we introduced linguistic-
based and visual-based techniques to extract features from
text information. Note that linguistic-based features have
been widely studied for general NLP tasks, such as text clas-
siﬁcation and clustering, and speciﬁc applications such as
author identiﬁcation [32] and deception detection [22], but
the underlying characteristics of fake news have not been
fully understood. Moreover, embedding techniques, such as
word embedding and deep neural networks, are attracting
much attention for textual feature extraction, and has the
potential to learn better representations [90; 87; 88]. In ad-
dition, visual features extracted from images are also shown
to be important indicators for fake news [38]. However, very
limited research has been done to exploit eﬀective visual fea-
tures, including traditional local and global features [61] and
newly emerging deep network-based features [43; 89; 85],
for the fake news detection problem. Recently, it has been
shown that advanced tools can manipulate video footage of
public ﬁgures [80], synthesize high quality videos [74], etc.
Thus, it becomes much more challenging and important to
diﬀerentiate real and fake visual content, and more advanced
visual-based features are needed for this research. From a
social context perspective, we introduced user-based, post-
based, and network-based features. Existing user-based fea-
tures mainly focus on general user proﬁles, rather than dif-
ferentiating account types separately and extracting user-
speciﬁc features. Post-based features can be represented us-
ing other techniques, such as convolutional neural networks
(CNN) [69], to better capture people’s opinions and reac-
tions toward fake news. Images in social media posts can
also be utilized to better understand users’ sentiments [91]
toward news events. Network-based features are extracted
to represent how diﬀerent types of networks are constructed.
It is important to extend this preliminary work to explore
(i) how other networks can be constructed in terms of diﬀer-
ent aspects of relationships among relevant users and posts;
and (ii) other advanced methods of network representations,
such as network embedding [78; 86].

Model-oriented: Model-oriented fake news research opens
the door to building more eﬀective and practical models for
fake news detection. Most previously mentioned approaches
focus on extracting various features, incorporating theses
features into supervised classiﬁcation models, such as na¨ıve
Bayes, decision tree, logistic regression, k nearest neighbor

Figure 2: Future directions and open issues for fake news detection on social media.

(KNN), and support vector machines (SVM), and then se-
lecting the classiﬁer that performs the best [62; 75; 1]. More
research can be done to build more complex and eﬀective
models and to better utilize extracted features, such as ag-
gregation methods, probabilistic methods, ensemble methods,
or projection methods [73]. Speciﬁcally, we think there is
some promising research in the following directions. First,
aggregation methods combine diﬀerent feature representa-
tions into a weighted form and optimize the feature weights.
Second, since fake news may commonly mix true statements
with false claims, it may make more sense to predict the
likelihood of fake news instead of producing a binary value;
probabilistic models predict a probabilistic distribution of
class labels (i.e., fake news versus true news) by assuming
a generative model that pulls from the same distribution as
the original feature space [25]. Third, one of the major chal-
lenges for fake news detection is the fact that each feature,
such as source credibility, news content style, or social re-
sponse, has some limitations to directly predict fake news on
its own. Ensemble methods build a conjunction of several
weak classiﬁers to learn a strong classiﬁer that is more suc-
cessful than any individual classiﬁer alone; ensembles have
been widely applied to various applications in the machine
learning literature [20]. It may be beneﬁcial to build ensem-
ble models as news content and social context features each
have supplementary information that has the potential to
boost fake news detection performance. Finally, fake news
content or social context information may be noisy in the
raw feature space; projection methods refer to approaches
that lean projection functions to map between original fea-
ture spaces (e.g., news content features and social context
features) and the latent feature spaces that may be more
useful for classiﬁcation.
Moreover, most existing approaches are supervised, which
requires a pre-annotated fake news ground truth dataset
to train a model. However, obtaining a reliable fake news
dataset is very time and labor intensive, as the process of-
ten requires expert annotators to perform careful analysis of
claims and additional evidence, context, and reports from
authoritative sources. Thus, it is also important to con-
sider scenarios where limited or no labeled fake news pieces
are available in which semi-supervised or unsupervised mod-
els can be applied. While the models created by super-

vised classiﬁcation methods may be more accurate given a
well-curated ground truth dataset for training, unsupervised
models can be more practical because unlabeled datasets are
easier to obtain.

Application-oriented: Application-oriented fake news re-
search encompass research that goes into other areas beyond
fake news detection. We propose two major directions along
these lines: fake news diﬀusion and fake news intervention.
Fake news diﬀusion characterizes the diﬀusion paths and
patterns of fake news on social media sites. Some early re-
search has shown that true information and misinformation
follow diﬀerent patterns when propagating in online social
networks [18; 51]. Similarly, the diﬀusion of fake news in
social media demonstrates its own characteristics that need
further investigation, such as social dimensions, life cycle,
spreader identiﬁcation, etc. Social dimensions refer to the
heterogeneity and weak dependency of social connections
within diﬀerent social communities. Users’ perceptions of
fake news pieces are highly aﬀected by their like-minded
friends in social media (i.e., echo chambers), while the de-
gree diﬀers along diﬀerent social dimensions. Thus, it is
worth exploring why and how diﬀerent social dimensions
play a role in spreading fake news in terms of diﬀerent top-
ics, such as political, education, sports, etc. The fake news
diﬀusion process also has diﬀerent stages in terms of peo-
ple’s attentions and reactions as time goes by, resulting in
a unique life cycle. Research has shown that breaking news
and in-depth news demonstrate diﬀerent life cycles in social
media [10]. Studying the life cycle of fake news will provide
deeper understanding of how particular stories “go viral”
from normal public discourse. Tracking the life cycle of fake
news on social media requires recording essential trajectories
of fake news diﬀusion in general [71], as well as further in-
vestigations of the process for speciﬁc fake news pieces, such
as graph-based models and evolution-based models [27]. In
addition, identifying key spreaders of fake news is crucial to
mitigate the diﬀusion scope in social media. Note that key
spreaders can be categorized in two ways, i.e., stance and
authenticity. Along the stance dimensions, spreaders can
either be (i) clariﬁers, who propose skeptical and opposing
viewpoints towards fake news and try to clarify them; or (ii)
persuaders, who spread fake news with supporting opinions

to persuade others to believe it. In this sense, it is impor-
tant to explore how to detect clariﬁers and persuaders and
better use them to control the dissemination of fake news.
From an authenticity perspective, spreaders could be either
human, bot, or cyborg. Social bots have been used to inten-
tionally spread fake news in social media, which motivates
further research to better characterize and detect malicious
accounts designed for propaganda.
Finally, we also propose further research into fake news in-
tervention, which aims to reduce the eﬀects of fake news
by proactive intervention methods that minimize the spread
scope or reactive intervention methods after fake news goes
viral. Proactive fake news intervention methods try to (i)
remove malicious accounts that spread fake news or fake
news itself to isolate it from future consumers; (ii) immu-
nize users with true news to change the belief of users that
may already have been aﬀected by fake news. There is recent
research that attempts to use content-based immunization
and network-based immunization methods in misinforma-
tion intervention [94; 97]. One approach uses a multivariate
Hawkes process to model both true news and fake news and
mitigate the spreading of fake news in real-time [21]. The
aforementioned spreader detection techniques can also be
applied to target certain users (e.g., persuaders) in social
media to stop spreading fake news, or other users (e.g. clar-
iﬁers) to maximize the spread of corresponding true news.

7. CONCLUSION
With the increasing popularity of social media, more and
more people consume news from social media instead of tra-
ditional news media. However, social media has also been
used to spread fake news, which has strong negative impacts
on individual users and broader society. In this article, we
explored the fake news problem by reviewing existing lit-
erature in two phases: characterization and detection.
In
the characterization phase, we introduced the basic concepts
and principles of fake news in both traditional media and so-
cial media. In the detection phase, we reviewed existing fake
news detection approaches from a data mining perspective,
including feature extraction and model construction. We
also further discussed the datasets, evaluation metrics, and
promising future directions in fake news detection research
and expand the ﬁeld to other applications.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by, or in part
by, the ONR grant N00014-16-1-2257.

9. REFERENCES

[1] Sadia Afroz, Michael Brennan, and Rachel Green-
stadt. Detecting hoaxes, frauds, and deception in writ-
ing style online. In ISSP’12.

[2] Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow. Social media
and fake news in the 2016 election. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.

[3] Solomon E Asch and H Guetzkow. Eﬀects of group
pressure upon the modiﬁcation and distortion of judg-
ments. Groups, leadership, and men, pages 222–236,
1951.

[4] Meital Balmas. When fake news becomes real: Com-
bined exposure to multiple news sources and political
attitudes of ineﬃcacy, alienation, and cynicism. Com-
munication Research, 41(3):430–454, 2014.

[5] Michele Banko, Michael J Cafarella, Stephen Soder-
land, Matthew Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. Open
information extraction from the web. In IJCAI’07.

[6] Alessandro Bessi and Emilio Ferrara. Social bots dis-
tort the 2016 us presidential election online discussion.
First Monday, 21(11), 2016.

[7] Prakhar Biyani, Kostas Tsioutsiouliklis, and John
Blackmer. ” 8 amazing secrets for getting more clicks”:
Detecting clickbaits in news streams using article in-
formality. In AAAI’16.

[8] Jonas Nygaard Blom and Kenneth Reinecke Hansen.
Click bait: Forward-reference as lure in online news
headlines. Journal of Pragmatics, 76:87–100, 2015.

[9] Paul R Brewer, Dannagal Goldthwaite Young, and
Michelle Morreale. The impact of real news about
fake news: Intertextual processes and political satire.
International Journal of Public Opinion Research,
25(3):323–343, 2013.

[10] Carlos Castillo, Mohammed El-Haddad, J¨urgen Pfef-
fer, and Matt Stempeck. Characterizing the life cycle
of online news stories using social media reactions. In
CSCW’14.

[11] Carlos Castillo, Marcelo Mendoza, and Barbara
In

Information credibility on twitter.

Poblete.
WWW’11.

[12] Abhijnan Chakraborty, Bhargavi Paranjape, Sourya
Kakarla, and Niloy Ganguly. Stop clickbait: Detect-
ing and preventing clickbaits in online news media. In
ASONAM’16.

[13] Yimin Chen, Niall J Conroy, and Victoria L Rubin.
Misleading online content: Recognizing clickbait as
false news. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM on Work-
shop on Multimodal Deception Detection, pages 15–19.
ACM, 2015.

[14] Justin Cheng, Michael Bernstein, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, and Jure Leskovec. Anyone can be-
come a troll: Causes of trolling behavior in online dis-
cussions. In CSCW ’17.

[15] Zi Chu, Steven Gianvecchio, Haining Wang, and
Sushil Jajodia. Detecting automation of twitter ac-
counts: Are you a human, bot, or cyborg?
IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
9(6):811–824, 2012.

[16] Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia, Prashant Shiralkar,
Luis M Rocha, Johan Bollen, Filippo Menczer, and
Alessandro Flammini. Computational fact checking
from knowledge networks. PloS one, 10(6):e0128193,
2015.

[17] Niall J Conroy, Victoria L Rubin, and Yimin Chen.
Automatic deception detection: Methods for ﬁnding
fake news. Proceedings of the Association for Infor-
mation Science and Technology, 52(1):1–4, 2015.

[18] Michela Del Vicario, Alessandro Bessi, Fabiana Zollo,
Fabio Petroni, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli, H Eu-

gene Stanley, and Walter Quattrociocchi. The spread-
ing of misinformation online. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 113(3):554–559, 2016.

[19] Michela Del Vicario, Gianna Vivaldo, Alessandro
Bessi, Fabiana Zollo, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli,
and Walter Quattrociocchi. Echo chambers: Emo-
tional contagion and group polarization on facebook.
Scientiﬁc Reports, 6, 2016.

[20] Thomas G Dietterich et al. Ensemble methods in ma-
chine learning. Multiple classiﬁer systems, 1857:1–15,
2000.

[21] Mehrdad Farajtabar, Jiachen Yang, Xiaojing Ye,
Huan Xu, Rakshit Trivedi, Elias Khalil, Shuang Li,
Le Song, and Hongyuan Zha. Fake news mitigation
via point process based intervention. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.07823, 2017.

[22] Song Feng, Ritwik Banerjee, and Yejin Choi. Syntactic
stylometry for deception detection. In ACL’12.

[23] Emilio Ferrara, Onur Varol, Clayton Davis, Filippo
Menczer, and Alessandro Flammini. The rise of so-
cial bots. Communications of the ACM, 59(7):96–104,
2016.

[24] Johannes F¨urnkranz. A study using n-gram features
for text categorization. Austrian Research Institute for
Artiﬁcal Intelligence, 3(1998):1–10, 1998.

[25] Ashutosh Garg and Dan Roth. Understanding proba-

bilistic classiﬁers. ECML’01.

[26] Matthew Gentzkow, Jesse M Shapiro, and Daniel F
Stone. Media bias in the marketplace: Theory. Tech-
nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
2014.

[27] Adrien Guille, Hakim Hacid, Cecile Favre, and
Djamel A Zighed. Information diﬀusion in online social
networks: A survey. ACM Sigmod Record, 42(2):17–
28, 2013.

[28] Aditi Gupta, Hemank Lamba, Ponnurangam Ku-
maraguru, and Anupam Joshi. Faking sandy: charac-
terizing and identifying fake images on twitter during
hurricane sandy. In WWW’13.

[29] Manish Gupta, Peixiang Zhao, and Jiawei Han. Eval-
uating event credibility on twitter. In PSDM’12.

[30] David J Hand and Robert J Till. A simple generalisa-
tion of the area under the roc curve for multiple class
classiﬁcation problems. Machine learning, 2001.

[31] Naeemul Hassan, Chengkai Li, and Mark Tremayne.
Detecting check-worthy factual claims in presidential
debates. In CIKM’15.

[32] John Houvardas and Efstathios Stamatatos. N-gram
feature selection for authorship identiﬁcation. Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence: Methodology, Systems, and Applica-
tions, pages 77–86, 2006.

[33] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, Huiji Gao, and Huan Liu. So-
cial spammer detection with sentiment information. In
ICDM’14.

[34] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, and Huan Liu. Online social

spammer detection. In AAAI’14, pages 59–65, 2014.

[35] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, Yanchao Zhang, and Huan Liu.

Social spammer detection in microblogging. In IJ-
CAI’13.

[36] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Yongdong
Zhang. News credibility evaluation on microblog with
a hierarchical propagation model. In ICDM’14.

[37] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yongdong Zhang, and Jiebo
Luo. News veriﬁcation by exploiting conﬂicting social
viewpoints in microblogs. In AAAI’16.

[38] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yongdong Zhang, Jianshe Zhou,
and Qi Tian. Novel visual and statistical image fea-
tures for microblogs news veriﬁcation. IEEE Transac-
tions on Multimedia, 19(3):598–608, 2017.

[39] Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. Prospect the-
ory: An analysis of decision under risk. Economet-
rica: Journal of the econometric society, pages 263–
291, 1979.

[40] Jean-Noel Kapferer. Rumors: Uses, Interpretation

and Necessity. Routledge, 2017.

[41] David O Klein and Joshua R Wueller. Fake news: A

legal perspective. 2017.

[42] Sejeong Kwon, Meeyoung Cha, Kyomin Jung, Wei
Chen, and Yajun Wang. Prominent features of rumor
propagation in online social media. In ICDM’13, pages
1103–1108. IEEE, 2013.

[43] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoﬀrey Hinton.
Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444, 2015.

[44] Kyumin Lee, James Caverlee, and Steve Webb. Un-
covering social spammers: social honeypots+ machine
learning. In SIGIR’10.

[45] Tony Lesce. Scan: Deception detection by scientiﬁc
content analysis. Law and Order, 38(8):3–6, 1990.

[46] Yaliang Li, Jing Gao, Chuishi Meng, Qi Li, Lu Su,
Bo Zhao, Wei Fan, and Jiawei Han. A survey on
truth discovery. ACM Sigkdd Explorations Newsletter,
17(2):1–16, 2016.

[47] Charles X Ling, Jin Huang, and Harry Zhang. Auc: a
statistically consistent and more discriminating mea-
sure than accuracy.

[48] Jing Ma, Wei Gao, Prasenjit Mitra, Sejeong Kwon,
Bernard J Jansen, Kam-Fai Wong, and Meeyoung
Cha. Detecting rumors from microblogs with recur-
rent neural networks.

[49] Jing Ma, Wei Gao, Zhongyu Wei, Yueming Lu, and
Kam-Fai Wong. Detect rumors using time series of so-
cial context information on microblogging websites. In
CIKM’15.

[50] Amr Magdy and Nayer Wanas. Web-based statistical
fact checking of textual documents. In Proceedings of
the 2nd international workshop on Search and mining
user-generated contents, pages 103–110. ACM, 2010.

[51] Filippo Menczer. The spread of misinformation in so-

cial media. In WWW’16.

[52] Tanushree Mitra and Eric Gilbert. Credbank: A large-
scale social media corpus with associated credibility
annotations. In ICWSM’15.

[53] Saif M Mohammad, Parinaz Sobhani, and Svet-
lana Kiritchenko. Stance and sentiment in tweets.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT),
17(3):26, 2017.

Huan Liu. Leveraging the implicit structure within so-
cial media for emergent rumor detection. In CIKM’15.

[54] Fred Morstatter, Harsh Dani, Justin Sampson, and
Huan Liu. Can one tamper with the sample api?: To-
ward neutralizing bias from spam and bot content. In
WWW’16.

[55] Fred Morstatter, Liang Wu, Tahora H Nazer, Kath-
leen M Carley, and Huan Liu. A new approach to bot
detection: Striking the balance between precision and
recall. In ASONAM’16.

[56] Subhabrata Mukherjee and Gerhard Weikum. Lever-
aging joint interactions for credibility analysis in news
communities. In CIKM’15.

[57] Eni Mustafaraj and Panagiotis Takis Metaxas. The
fake news spreading plague: Was it preventable?
arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.06988, 2017.

[58] Raymond S Nickerson. Conﬁrmation bias: A ubiqui-
tous phenomenon in many guises. Review of general
psychology, 2(2):175, 1998.

[59] Brendan Nyhan and Jason Reiﬂer. When corrections
fail: The persistence of political misperceptions. Po-
litical Behavior, 32(2):303–330, 2010.

[60] Christopher Paul and Miriam Matthews. The russian

ﬁrehose of falsehood propaganda model.

[61] Dong ping Tian et al. A review on image feature ex-
traction and representation techniques. International
Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering,
8(4):385–396, 2013.

[62] Martin Potthast, Johannes Kiesel, Kevin Reinartz,
Janek Bevendorﬀ, and Benno Stein. A stylometric in-
quiry into hyperpartisan and fake news. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.05638, 2017.

[63] Martin Potthast, Sebastian K¨opsel, Benno Stein, and
Matthias Hagen. Clickbait detection. In European
Conference on Information Retrieval, pages 810–817.
Springer, 2016.

[64] Vahed Qazvinian, Emily Rosengren, Dragomir R
Radev, and Qiaozhu Mei. Rumor has it: Identifying
misinformation in microblogs. In EMNLP’11.

[65] Walter Quattrociocchi, Antonio Scala, and Cass R

Sunstein. Echo chambers on facebook. 2016.

[66] Victoria L Rubin, Yimin Chen, and Niall J Conroy.
Deception detection for news: three types of fakes.
Proceedings of the Association for Information Science
and Technology, 52(1):1–4, 2015.

[67] Victoria L Rubin, Niall J Conroy, Yimin Chen, and
Sarah Cornwell. Fake news or truth? using satirical
cues to detect potentially misleading news. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 7–17, 2016.

[68] Victoria L Rubin and Tatiana Lukoianova. Truth and
deception at the rhetorical structure level. Journal of
the Association for Information Science and Technol-
ogy, 66(5):905–917, 2015.

[69] Natali Ruchansky, Sungyong Seo, and Yan Liu. Csi:
A hybrid deep model for fake news. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.06959, 2017.

[70] Justin Sampson, Fred Morstatter, Liang Wu, and

[71] Chengcheng Shao, Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia,
Alessandro Flammini, and Filippo Menczer. Hoaxy:
A platform for tracking online misinformation. In
WWW’16.

[72] Baoxu Shi and Tim Weninger. Fact checking in het-
erogeneous information networks. In WWW’16.

[73] Kai Shu, Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Reza Zafarani,
and Huan Liu. User identity linkage across online so-
cial networks: A review. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
Newsletter, 18(2):5–17, 2017.

[74] Supasorn Suwajanakorn, Steven M Seitz, and Ira
Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. Synthesizing obama: learn-
ing lip sync from audio. ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics (TOG), 36(4):95, 2017.

[75] Eugenio Tacchini, Gabriele Ballarin, Marco L
Della Vedova, Stefano Moret, and Luca de Alfaro.
Some like it hoax: Automated fake news detection
in social networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.07506,
2017.

[76] Henri Tajfel and John C Turner. An integrative theory
of intergroup conﬂict. The social psychology of inter-
group relations, 33(47):74, 1979.

[77] Henri Tajfel and John C Turner. The social identity

theory of intergroup behavior. 2004.

[78] Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang,
Jun Yan, and Qiaozhu Mei. Line: Large-scale infor-
mation network embedding. In WWW’15.

[79] Jiliang Tang, Yi Chang, and Huan Liu. Mining social
media with social theories: a survey. ACM SIGKDD
Explorations Newsletter, 15(2):20–29, 2014.

[80] Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, Marc Stamminger,
Christian Theobalt, and Matthias Nießner. Face2face:
Real-time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos.
In CVPR’16.

[81] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Advances in
prospect theory: Cumulative representation of uncer-
tainty. Journal of Risk and uncertainty, 5(4):297–323,
1992.

[82] Udo Undeutsch. Beurteilung der glaubhaftigkeit von
aussagen. Handbuch der psychologie, 11:26–181, 1967.

[83] Andreas Vlachos and Sebastian Riedel. Fact checking:
Task deﬁnition and dataset construction. ACL’14.

[84] Aldert Vrij. Criteria-based content analysis: A quali-
tative review of the ﬁrst 37 studies. Psychology, Public
Policy, and Law, 11(1):3, 2005.

[85] Suhang Wang, Charu Aggarwal, Jiliang Tang, and
Huan Liu. Attributed signed network embedding. In
CIKM’17.

[86] Suhang Wang,

Jiliang Tang, Charu Aggarwal,
Yi Chang, and Huan Liu. Signed network embedding
in social media. In SDM’17.

[87] Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Charu Aggarwal, and
Huan Liu. Linked document embedding for classiﬁca-
tion. In CIKM’16.

[88] Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Fred Morstatter, and
Huan Liu. Paired restricted boltzmann machine for
linked data. In CIKM’16.

[96] Liang Wu, Jundong Li, Xia Hu, and Huan Liu. Glean-
ing wisdom from the past: Early detection of emerging
rumors in social media. In SDM’17.

[89] Suhang Wang, Yilin Wang, Jiliang Tang, Kai Shu,
Suhas Ranganath, and Huan Liu. What your images
reveal: Exploiting visual contents for point-of-interest
recommendation. In WWW’17.

[90] William Yang Wang. ” liar, liar pants on ﬁre”: A
new benchmark dataset for fake news detection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.00648, 2017.

[91] Yilin Wang, Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Huan Liu,
and Baoxin Li. Unsupervised sentiment analysis for
social media images. In IJCAI, pages 2378–2379, 2015.

[92] Andrew Ward, L Ross, E Reed, E Turiel, and
T Brown. Naive realism in everyday life: Implications
for social conﬂict and misunderstanding. Values and
knowledge, pages 103–135, 1997.

[93] Gerhard Weikum. What computers should know,
shouldn’t know, and shouldn’t believe. In WWW’17.

[94] L Wu, F Morstatter, X Hu, and H Liu. Chapter 5:

Mining misinformation in social media, 2016.

[95] Liang Wu, Xia Hu, Fred Morstatter, and Huan Liu.
Adaptive spammer detection with sparse group mod-
eling. In ICWSM’17.

[97] Liang Wu, Fred Morstatter, Xia Hu, and Huan Liu.
Mining misinformation in social media. Big Data in
Complex and Social Networks, pages 123–152, 2016.

[98] You Wu, Pankaj K Agarwal, Chengkai Li, Jun Yang,
and Cong Yu. Toward computational fact-checking.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 7(7):589–600,
2014.

[99] Fan Yang, Yang Liu, Xiaohui Yu, and Min Yang. Au-
tomatic detection of rumor on sina weibo. In Proceed-
ings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Mining Data
Semantics, page 13. ACM, 2012.

[100] Robert B Zajonc. Attitudinal eﬀects of mere exposure.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 9(2p2):1,
1968.

[101] Robert B Zajonc. Mere exposure: A gateway to the
subliminal. Current directions in psychological science,
10(6):224–228, 2001.

[102] Arkaitz Zubiaga, Ahmet Aker, Kalina Bontcheva,
Maria Liakata, and Rob Procter. Detection and res-
olution of rumours in social media: A survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.00656, 2017.

Fake News Detection on Social Media:
A Data Mining Perspective

Kai Shu†, Amy Sliva‡, Suhang Wang†, Jiliang Tang (cid:92), and Huan Liu†
†Computer Science & Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
‡Charles River Analytics, Cambridge, MA, USA
(cid:92)Computer Science & Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
†{kai.shu,suhang.wang,huan.liu}@asu.edu,
‡asliva@cra.com, (cid:92) tangjili@msu.edu

7
1
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
 
 
]
I
S
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
7
6
9
1
0
.
8
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Social media for news consumption is a double-edged sword.
On the one hand, its low cost, easy access, and rapid dissem-
ination of information lead people to seek out and consume
news from social media. On the other hand, it enables the
wide spread of “fake news”, i.e., low quality news with in-
tentionally false information. The extensive spread of fake
news has the potential for extremely negative impacts on
individuals and society. Therefore, fake news detection on
social media has recently become an emerging research that
is attracting tremendous attention. Fake news detection
on social media presents unique characteristics and chal-
lenges that make existing detection algorithms from tradi-
tional news media ineﬀective or not applicable. First, fake
news is intentionally written to mislead readers to believe
false information, which makes it diﬃcult and nontrivial to
detect based on news content; therefore, we need to include
auxiliary information, such as user social engagements on
social media, to help make a determination. Second, ex-
ploiting this auxiliary information is challenging in and of
itself as users’ social engagements with fake news produce
data that is big, incomplete, unstructured, and noisy. Be-
cause the issue of fake news detection on social media is both
challenging and relevant, we conducted this survey to fur-
ther facilitate research on the problem. In this survey, we
present a comprehensive review of detecting fake news on
social media, including fake news characterizations on psy-
chology and social theories, existing algorithms from a data
mining perspective, evaluation metrics and representative
datasets. We also discuss related research areas, open prob-
lems, and future research directions for fake news detection
on social media.

INTRODUCTION

1.
As an increasing amount of our lives is spent interacting
online through social media platforms, more and more peo-
ple tend to seek out and consume news from social media
rather than traditional news organizations. The reasons for
this change in consumption behaviors are inherent in the
nature of these social media platforms: (i) it is often more
timely and less expensive to consume news on social media
compared with traditional news media, such as newspapers
or television; and (ii) it is easier to further share, comment

on, and discuss the news with friends or other readers on
social media. For example, 62 percent of U.S. adults get
news on social media in 2016, while in 2012, only 49 per-
cent reported seeing news on social media1.
It was also
found that social media now outperforms television as the
major news source2. Despite the advantages provided by
social media, the quality of news on social media is lower
than traditional news organizations. However, because it
is cheap to provide news online and much faster and easier
to disseminate through social media, large volumes of fake
news, i.e., those news articles with intentionally false infor-
mation, are produced online for a variety of purposes, such
as ﬁnancial and political gain. It was estimated that over 1
million tweets are related to fake news “Pizzagate”3 by the
end of the presidential election. Given the prevalence of this
new phenomenon, “Fake news” was even named the word of
the year by the Macquarie dictionary in 2016.
The extensive spread of fake news can have a serious nega-
tive impact on individuals and society. First, fake news can
break the authenticity balance of the news ecosystem. For
example, it is evident that the most popular fake news was
even more widely spread on Facebook than the most pop-
ular authentic mainstream news during the U.S. 2016 pres-
ident election4. Second, fake news intentionally persuades
consumers to accept biased or false beliefs. Fake news is
usually manipulated by propagandists to convey political
messages or inﬂuence. For example, some report shows that
Russia has created fake accounts and social bots to spread
false stories5. Third, fake news changes the way people in-
terpret and respond to real news. For example, some fake
news was just created to trigger people’s distrust and make
them confused, impeding their abilities to diﬀerentiate what
is true from what is not6. To help mitigate the negative ef-
fects caused by fake news–both to beneﬁt the public and
the news ecosystem–It’s critical that we develop methods to
automatically detect fake news on social media.

1http://www.journalism.org/2016/05/26/news-use-across-
social-media-platforms-2016/
2http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-36528256
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pizzagate conspiracy theory
4https://www.buzzfeed.com/craigsilverman/viral-
fake-election-news-outperformed-real-news-on-
facebook?utm term=.nrg0WA1VP0#.gjJyKapW5y
5http://time.com/4783932/inside-russia-social-media-war-
america/
6https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/28/opinion/fake-
news-and-the-internet-shell-game.html? r=0

Detecting fake news on social media poses several new and
challenging research problems. Though fake news itself is
not a new problem–nations or groups have been using the
news media to execute propaganda or inﬂuence operations
for centuries–the rise of web-generated news on social me-
dia makes fake news a more powerful force that challenges
traditional journalistic norms. There are several character-
istics of this problem that make it uniquely challenging for
automated detection. First, fake news is intentionally writ-
ten to mislead readers, which makes it nontrivial to detect
simply based on news content. The content of fake news is
rather diverse in terms of topics, styles and media platforms,
and fake news attempts to distort truth with diverse lin-
guistic styles while simultaneously mocking true news. For
example, fake news may cite true evidence within the in-
correct context to support a non-factual claim [22]. Thus,
existing hand-crafted and data-speciﬁc textual features are
generally not suﬃcient for fake news detection. Other aux-
iliary information must also be applied to improve detec-
tion, such as knowledge base and user social engagements.
Second, exploiting this auxiliary information actually leads
to another critical challenge: the quality of the data itself.
Fake news is usually related to newly emerging, time-critical
events, which may not have been properly veriﬁed by exist-
ing knowledge bases due to the lack of corroborating ev-
idence or claims.
In addition, users’ social engagements
with fake news produce data that is big, incomplete, un-
structured, and noisy [79]. Eﬀective methods to diﬀerenti-
ate credible users, extract useful post features and exploit
network interactions are an open area of research and need
further investigations.
In this article, we present an overview of fake news detection
and discuss promising research directions. The key motiva-
tions of this survey are summarized as follows:

• Fake news on social media has been occurring for sev-
eral years; however, there is no agreed upon deﬁnition
of the term “fake news”. To better guide the future
directions of fake news detection research, appropriate
clariﬁcations are necessary.

• Social media has proved to be a powerful source for
fake news dissemination. There are some emerging
patterns that can be utilized for fake news detection
in social media. A review on existing fake news detec-
tion methods under various social media scenarios can
provide a basic understanding on the state-of-the-art
fake news detection methods.

• Fake news detection on social media is still in the early
age of development, and there are still many challeng-
ing issues that need further investigations. It is neces-
sary to discuss potential research directions that can
improve fake news detection and mitigation capabili-
ties.

To facilitate research in fake news detection on social me-
dia, in this survey we will review two aspects of the fake
news detection problem: characterization and detection. As
shown in Figure 1, we will ﬁrst describe the background of
the fake news detection problem using theories and prop-
erties from psychology and social studies; then we present
the detection approaches. Our major contributions of this
survey are summarized as follows:

• We discuss the narrow and broad deﬁnitions of fake
news that cover most existing deﬁnitions in the litera-
ture and further present the unique characteristics of
fake news on social media and its implications com-
pared with the traditional media;

• We give an overview of existing fake news detection
methods with a principled way to group representative
methods into diﬀerent categories; and

• We discuss several open issues and provide future di-

rections of fake news detection in social media.

The remainder of this survey is organized as follows.
In
Section 2, we present the deﬁnition of fake news and char-
acterize it by comparing diﬀerent theories and properties in
both traditional and social media. In Section 3, we continue
to formally deﬁne the fake news detection problem and sum-
marize the methods to detect fake news. In Section 4, we
discuss the datasets and evaluation metrics used by existing
methods. We brieﬂy introduce areas related to fake news de-
tection on social media in Section 5. Finally, we discuss the
open issues and future directions in Section 6 and conclude
this survey in Section 7.

2. FAKE NEWS CHARACTERIZATION
In this section, we introduce the basic social and psychologi-
cal theories related to fake news and discuss more advanced
patterns introduced by social media. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
discuss various deﬁnitions of fake news and diﬀerentiate re-
lated concepts that are usually misunderstood as fake news.
We then describe diﬀerent aspects of fake news on tradi-
tional media and the new patterns found on social media.

2.1 Deﬁnitions of Fake News
Fake news has existed for a very long time, nearly the same
amount of time as news began to circulate widely after the
printing press was invented in 14397. However, there is no
agreed deﬁnition of the term “fake news”. Therefore, we ﬁrst
discuss and compare some widely used deﬁnitions of fake
news in the existing literature, and provide our deﬁnition of
fake news that will be used for the remainder of this survey.
A narrow deﬁnition of fake news is news articles that are in-
tentionally and veriﬁably false and could mislead readers [2].
There are two key features of this deﬁnition: authenticity
and intent. First, fake news includes false information that
can be veriﬁed as such. Second, fake news is created with
dishonest intention to mislead consumers. This deﬁnition
has been widely adopted in recent studies [57; 17; 62; 41].
Broader deﬁnitions of fake news focus on the either authen-
ticity or intent of the news content. Some papers regard
satire news as fake news since the contents are false even
though satire is often entertainment-oriented and reveals its
own deceptiveness to the consumers [67; 4; 37; 9]. Other
literature directly treats deceptive news as fake news [66],
which includes serious fabrications, hoaxes, and satires.
In this article, we use the narrow deﬁnition of fake news.
Formally, we state this deﬁnition as follows,

Definition 1 (Fake News) Fake news is a news article
that is intentionally and veriﬁably false.

7http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/12/fake-
news-history-long-violent-214535

Figure 1: Fake news on social media: from characterization to detection.

The reasons for choosing this narrow deﬁnition are three-
folds. First, the underlying intent of fake news provides both
theoretical and practical value that enables a deeper under-
standing and analysis of this topic. Second, any techniques
for truth veriﬁcation that apply to the narrow conception
of fake news can also be applied to under the broader deﬁ-
nition. Third, this deﬁnition is able to eliminate the ambi-
guities between fake news and related concepts that are not
considered in this article. The following concepts are not
fake news according to our deﬁnition: (1) satire news with
proper context, which has no intent to mislead or deceive
consumers and is unlikely to be mis-perceived as factual;
(2) rumors that did not originate from news events; (3) con-
spiracy theories, which are diﬃcult verify as true or false;
(4) misinformation that is created unintentionally; and (5)
hoaxes that are only motivated by fun or to scam targeted
individuals.

2.2 Fake News on Traditional News Media
Fake news itself is not a new problem. The media ecology
of fake news has been changing over time from newsprint to
radio/television and, recently, online news and social media.
We denote “traditional fake news” as the fake news problem
before social media had important eﬀects on its production
and dissemination. Next, we will describe several psycholog-
ical and social science foundations that describe the impact
of fake news at both the individual and social information
ecosystem levels.

Psychological Foundations of Fake News. Humans are
naturally not very good at diﬀerentiating between real and
fake news. There are several psychological and cognitive
theories that can explain this phenomenon and the inﬂuen-
tial power of fake news. Traditional fake news mainly tar-
gets consumers by exploiting their individual vulnerabilities.
There are two major factors which make consumers natu-
rally vulnerable to fake news: (i) Na¨ıve Realism: consumers
tend to believe that their perceptions of reality are the only
accurate views, while others who disagree are regarded as
uninformed, irrational, or biased [92]; and (ii) Conﬁrmation
Bias: consumers prefer to receive information that conﬁrms
their existing views [58]. Due to these cognitive biases inher-
ent in human nature, fake news can often be perceived as real
by consumers. Moreover, once the misperception is formed,
it is very hard to correct it. Psychology studies shows that
correction of false information (e.g., fake news) by the pre-
sentation of true, factual information is not only unhelpful

to reduce misperceptions, but sometimes may even increase
the misperceptions, especially among ideological groups [59].

Social Foundations of the Fake News Ecosystem.
Considering the entire news consumption ecosystem, we can
also describe some of the social dynamics that contribute to
the proliferation of fake news. Prospect theory describes
decision making as a process by which people make choices
based on the relative gains and losses as compared to their
current state [39; 81]. This desire for maximizing the reward
of a decision applies to social gains as well, for instance,
continued acceptance by others in a user’s immediate social
network. As described by social identity theory [76; 77] and
normative inﬂuence theory [3; 40], this preference for social
acceptance and aﬃrmation is essential to a person’s identity
and self-esteem, making users likely to choose “socially safe”
options when consuming and disseminating news informa-
tion, following the norms established in the community even
if the news being shared is fake news.
This rational theory of fake news interactions can be mod-
eled from an economic game theoretical perspective [26] by
formulating the news generation and consumption cycle as a
two-player strategy game. For explaining fake news, we as-
sume there are two kinds of key players in the information
ecosystem: publisher and consumer. The process of news
publishing is modeled as a mapping from original signal s
to resultant news report a with an eﬀect of distortion bias
b, i.e., s b−→ a, where b = [−1, 0, 1] indicates [lef t, no, right]
biases take eﬀects on news publishing process. Intuitively,
this is capturing the degree to which a news article may be
biased or distorted to produce fake news. The utility for
the publisher stems from two perspectives: (i) short-term
utility: the incentive to maximize proﬁt, which is positively
correlated with the number of consumers reached; (ii) long-
term utility: their reputation in terms of news authenticity.
Utility of consumers consists of two parts: (i) information
utility: obtaining true and unbiased information (usually ex-
tra investment cost needed); (ii) psychology utility: receiving
news that satisﬁes their prior opinions and social needs, e.g.,
conﬁrmation bias and prospect theory. Both publisher and
consumer try to maximize their overall utilities in this strat-
egy game of the news consumption process. We can capture
the fact that fake news happens when the short-term utility
dominates a publisher’s overall utility and psychology utility
dominates the consumer’s overall utility, and an equilibrium
is maintained. This explains the social dynamics that lead
to an information ecosystem where fake news can thrive.

2.3 Fake News on Social Media
In this subsection, we will discuss some unique character-
istics of fake news on social media. Speciﬁcally, we will
highlight the key features of fake news that are enabled by
social media. Note that the aforementioned characteristics
of traditional fake news are also applicable to social media.

Malicious Accounts on Social Media for Propaganda.
While many users on social media are legitimate, social me-
dia users may also be malicious, and in some cases are not
even real humans. The low cost of creating social media
accounts also encourages malicious user accounts, such as
social bots, cyborg users, and trolls. A social bot refers to
a social media account that is controlled by a computer al-
gorithm to automatically produce content and interact with
humans (or other bot users) on social media [23]. Social bots
can become malicious entities designed speciﬁcally with the
purpose to do harm, such as manipulating and spreading
fake news on social media. Studies shows that social bots
distorted the 2016 U.S. presidential election online discus-
sions on a large scale [6], and that around 19 million bot
accounts tweeted in support of either Trump or Clinton in
the week leading up to election day8. Trolls, real human
users who aim to disrupt online communities and provoke
consumers into an emotional response, are also playing an
important role in spreading fake news on social media. For
example, evidence suggests that there were 1,000 paid Rus-
sian trolls spreading fake news on Hillary Clinton9. Trolling
behaviors are highly aﬀected by people’s mood and the con-
text of online discussions, which enables the easy dissemi-
nation of fake news among otherwise “normal” online com-
munities [14]. The eﬀect of trolling is to trigger people’s
inner negative emotions, such as anger and fear, resulting
in doubt, distrust, and irrational behavior. Finally, cyborg
users can spread fake news in a way that blends automated
activities with human input. Usually cyborg accounts are
registered by human as a camouﬂage and set automated pro-
grams to perform activities in social media. The easy switch
of functionalities between human and bot oﬀers cyborg users
unique opportunities to spread fake news [15]. In a nutshell,
these highly active and partisan malicious accounts on so-
cial media become the powerful sources and proliferation of
fake news.

Echo Chamber Eﬀect. Social media provides a new paradigm
of information creation and consumption for users. The
information seeking and consumption process are chang-
ing from a mediated form (e.g., by journalists) to a more
disinter-mediated way [19]. Consumers are selectively ex-
posed to certain kinds of news because of the way news
feed appear on their homepage in social media, amplifying
the psychological challenges to dispelling fake news identi-
ﬁed above. For example, users on Facebook always follow
like-minded people and thus receive news that promote their
favored existing narratives [65]. Therefore, users on social
media tend to form groups containing like-minded people
where they then polarize their opinions, resulting in an echo
chamber eﬀect. The echo chamber eﬀect facilitates the pro-

8http://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/2016/11/18/resource-for-
understanding-political-bots/
9http://www.huﬃngtonpost.com/entry/russian-trolls-fake-
news us 58dde6bae4b08194e3b8d5c4

cess by which people consume and believe fake news due to
the following psychological factors [60]: (1) social credibility,
which means people are more likely to perceive a source as
credible if others perceive the source is credible, especially
when there is not enough information available to access the
truthfulness of the source; and (2) frequency heuristic, which
means that consumers may naturally favor information they
hear frequently, even if it is fake news. Studies have shown
that increased exposure to an idea is enough to generate a
positive opinion of it [100; 101], and in echo chambers, users
continue to share and consume the same information. As a
result, this echo chamber eﬀect creates segmented, homoge-
neous communities with a very limited information ecosys-
tem. Research shows that the homogeneous communities
become the primary driver of information diﬀusion that fur-
ther strengthens polarization [18].

3. FAKE NEWS DETECTION
In the previous section, we introduced the conceptual char-
acterization of traditional fake news and fake news in so-
cial media. Based on this characterization, we further ex-
plore the problem deﬁnition and proposed approaches for
fake news detection.

3.1 Problem Deﬁnition
In this subsection, we present the details of mathematical
formulation of fake news detection on social media. Specif-
ically, we will introduce the deﬁnition of key components
of fake news and then present the formal deﬁnition of fake
news detection. The basic notations are deﬁned below,

• Let a refer to a News Article. It consists of two ma-
jor components: Publisher and Content. Publisher (cid:126)pa
includes a set of proﬁle features to describe the origi-
nal author, such as name, domain, age, among other
attributes. Content (cid:126)ca consists of a set of attributes
that represent the news article and includes headline,
text, image, etc.

• We also deﬁne Social News Engagements as a set of
tuples E = {eit} to represent the process of how news
spread over time among n users U = {u1, u2, ..., un}
and their corresponding posts P = {p1, p2, ..., pn} on
social media regarding news article a. Each engage-
ment eit = {ui, pi, t} represents that a user ui spreads
news article a using pi at time t. Note that we set
t = N ull if the article a does not have any engage-
ment yet and thus ui represents the publisher.

Definition 2 (Fake News Detection) Given the social
news engagements E among n users for news article a, the
task of fake news detection is to predict whether the news
article a is a fake news piece or not, i.e., F : E → {0, 1}
such that,

F(a) =

(cid:40)

1,
0, otherwise.

if a is a piece of fake news,

(1)

where F is the prediction function we want to learn.
Note that we deﬁne fake news detection as a binary classiﬁ-
cation problem for the following reason: fake news is essen-
tially a distortion bias on information manipulated by the
publisher. According to previous research about media bias

theory [26], distortion bias is usually modeled as a binary
classiﬁcation problem.
Next, we propose a general data mining framework for fake
news detection which includes two phases: (i) feature ex-
traction and (ii) model construction. The feature extraction
phase aims to represent news content and related auxiliary
information in a formal mathematical structure, and model
construction phase further builds machine learning models
to better diﬀerentiate fake news and real news based on the
feature representations.

3.2 Feature Extraction
Fake news detection on traditional news media mainly relies
on news content, while in social media, extra social context
auxiliary information can be used to as additional informa-
tion to help detect fake news. Thus, we will present the
details of how to extract and represent useful features from
news content and social context.

3.2.1 News Content Features
News content features (cid:126)ca describe the meta information re-
lated to a piece of news. A list of representative news content
attributes are listed below:

• Source: Author or publisher of the news article

• Headline: Short title text that aims to catch the at-
tention of readers and describes the main topic of the
article

• Body Text: Main text that elaborates the details of
the news story; there is usually a major claim that is
speciﬁcally highlighted and that shapes the angle of
the publisher

• Image/Video: Part of the body content of a news
article that provides visual cues to frame the story

Based on these raw content attributes, diﬀerent kinds of
feature representations can be built to extract discriminative
characteristics of fake news. Typically, the news content we
are looking at will mostly be linguistic-based and visual-
based, described in more detail below.

Linguistic-based: Since fake news pieces are intention-
ally created for ﬁnancial or political gain rather than to re-
port objective claims, they often contain opinionated and
inﬂammatory language, crafted as “clickbait” (i.e., to en-
tice users to click on the link to read the full article) or
to incite confusion [13]. Thus, it is reasonable to exploit
linguistic features that capture the diﬀerent writing styles
and sensational headlines to detect fake news. Linguistic-
based features are extracted from the text content in terms
of document organizations from diﬀerent levels, such as char-
acters, words, sentences, and documents. In order to cap-
ture the diﬀerent aspects of fake news and real news, ex-
isting work utilized both common linguistic features and
domain-speciﬁc linguistic features. Common linguistic fea-
tures are often used to represent documents for various tasks
in natural language processing. Typical common linguis-
including character-
tic features are:
level and word-level features, such as total words, charac-
ters per word, frequency of large words, and unique words;
(ii) syntactic features, including sentence-level features, such

(i) lexical features,

as frequency of function words and phrases (i.e., “n-grams”
and bag-of-words approaches [24]) or punctuation and parts-
of-speech (POS) tagging. Domain-speciﬁc linguistic fea-
tures, which are speciﬁcally aligned to news domain, such
as quoted words, external links, number of graphs, and the
average length of graphs, etc [62]. Moreover, other features
can be speciﬁcally designed to capture the deceptive cues
in writing styles to diﬀerentiate fake news, such as lying-
detection features [1].

Visual-based: Visual cues have been shown to be an im-
portant manipulator for fake news propaganda10. As we
have characterized, fake news exploits the individual vulner-
abilities of people and thus often relies on sensational or even
fake images to provoke anger or other emotional response of
consumers. Visual-based features are extracted from visual
images and videos) to capture the diﬀerent
elements (e.g.
characteristics for fake news. Faking images were identiﬁed
based on various user-level and tweet-level hand-crafted fea-
tures using classiﬁcation framework [28]. Recently, various
visual and statistical features has been extracted for news
veriﬁcation [38]. Visual features include clarity score, coher-
ence score, similarity distribution histogram, diversity score,
and clustering score. Statistical features include count, im-
age ratio, multi-image ratio, hot image ratio, long image
ratio, etc.

Social Context Features

3.2.2
In addition to features related directly to the content of
the news articles, additional social context features can also
be derived from the user-driven social engagements of news
consumption on social media platform. Social engagements
represent the news proliferation process over time, which
provides useful auxiliary information to infer the veracity of
news articles. Note that few papers exist in the literature
that detect fake news using social context features. How-
ever, because we believe this is a critical aspect of successful
fake news detection, we introduce a set of common features
utilized in similar research areas, such as rumor veracity
classiﬁcation on social media. Generally, there are three
major aspects of the social media context that we want to
represent: users, generated posts, and networks. Below, we
investigate how we can extract and represent social context
features from these three aspects to support fake news de-
tection.

User-based: As we mentioned in Section 2.3, fake news
pieces are likely to be created and spread by non-human
accounts, such as social bots or cyborgs. Thus, capturing
users’ proﬁles and characteristics by user-based features can
provide useful information for fake news detection. User-
based features represent the characteristics of those users
who have interactions with the news on social media. These
features can be categorized across diﬀerent levels: individual
level and group level. Individual level features are extracted
to infer the credibility and reliability for each user using
various aspects of user demographics, such as registration
age, number of followers/followees, number of tweets the
user has authored, etc [11]. Group level user features cap-
ture overall characteristics of groups of users related to the
news [99]. The assumption is that the spreaders of fake news

10https://www.wired.com/2016/12/photos-fuel-spread-fake-
news/

and real news may form diﬀerent communities with unique
characteristics that can be depicted by group level features.
Commonly used group level features come from aggregat-
ing (e.g., averaging and weighting) individual level features,
such as ‘percentage of veriﬁed users’ and ‘average number
of followers’ [49; 42].

are properly built, existing network metrics can be applied
as feature representations. For example, degree and cluster-
ing coeﬃcient have been used to characterize the diﬀusion
network [42] and friendship network [42]. Other approaches
learn the latent node embedding features by using SVD [69]
or network propagation algorithms [37].

Post-based: People express their emotions or opinions to-
wards fake news through social media posts, such as skep-
tical opinions, sensational reactions, etc. Thus, it is rea-
sonable to extract post-based features to help ﬁnd potential
fake news via reactions from the general public as expressed
in posts. Post-based features focus on identifying useful in-
formation to infer the veracity of news from various aspects
of relevant social media posts. These features can be cat-
egorized as post level, group level, and temporal level. Post
level features generate feature values for each post. The
aforementioned linguistic-based features and some embed-
ding approaches [69] for news content can also be applied
for each post. Speciﬁcally, there are unique features for
posts that represent the social response from general pub-
lic, such as stance, topic, and credibility. Stance features (or
viewpoints) indicate the users’ opinions towards the news,
such as supporting, denying, etc [37]. Topic features can be
extracted using topic models, such as latent Dirichlet allo-
cation (LDA) [49]. Credibility features for posts assess the
degree of reliability [11]. Group level features aim to ag-
gregate the feature values for all relevant posts for speciﬁc
news articles by using “wisdom of crowds”. For example,
the average credibility scores are used to evaluate the credi-
bility of news [37]. A more comprehensive list of group-level
post features can also be found in [11]. Temporal level fea-
tures consider the temporal variations of post level feature
values [49]. Unsupervised embedding methods, such as re-
current neural network (RNN), are utilized to capture the
changes in posts over time [69; 48]. Based on the shape of
this time series for various metrics of relevant posts (e.g,
number of posts), mathematical features can be computed,
such as SpikeM parameters [42].

Network-based: Users form diﬀerent networks on social
media in terms of interests, topics, and relations. As men-
tioned before, fake news dissemination processes tend to
form an echo chamber cycle, highlighting the value of ex-
tracting network-based features to represent these types of
network patterns for fake news detection. Network-based
features are extracted via constructing speciﬁc networks among
the users who published related social media posts. Diﬀerent
types of networks can be constructed. The stance network
can be built with nodes indicating all the tweets relevant
to the news and the edge indicating the weights of similar-
ity of stances [37; 75]. Another type of network is the co-
occurrence network, which is built based on the user engage-
ments by counting whether those users write posts relevant
to the same news articles [69]. In addition, the friendship
network indicates the following/followee structure of users
who post related tweets [42]. An extension of this friendship
network is the diﬀusion network, which tracks the trajectory
of the spread of news [42], where nodes represent the users
and edges represent the information diﬀusion paths among
them. That is, a diﬀusion path between two users ui and uj
exists if and only if (1) uj follows ui, and (2) uj posts about
a given news only after ui does so. After these networks

3.3 Model Construction
In the previous section, we introduced features extracted
from diﬀerent sources, i.e., news content and social con-
text, for fake news detection. In this section, we discuss the
details of the model construction process for several exist-
ing approaches. Speciﬁcally we categorize existing methods
based on their main input sources as: News Content Models
and Social Context Models.

3.3.1 News Content Models
In this subsection, we focus on news content models, which
mainly rely on news content features and existing factual
sources to classify fake news. Speciﬁcally, existing approaches
can be categorized as Knowledge-based and Style-based.

Knowledge-based: Since fake news attempts to spread
false claims in news content, the most straightforward means
of detecting it is to check the truthfulness of major claims
in a news article to decide the news veracity. Knowledge-
based approaches aim to use external sources to fact-check
proposed claims in news content. The goal of fact-checking is
to assign a truth value to a claim in a particular context [83].
Fact-checking has attracted increasing attention, and many
eﬀorts have been made to develop a feasible automated fact-
checking system. Existing fact-checking approaches can be
categorized as expert-oriented, crowdsourcing-oriented, and
computational-oriented.

• Expert-oriented fact-checking heavily relies on human
domain experts to investigate relevant data and doc-
uments to construct the verdicts of claim veracity, for
example PolitiFact11, Snopes12, etc. However, expert-
oriented fact-checking is an intellectually demanding
and time-consuming process, which limits the poten-
tial for high eﬃciency and scalability.

• Crowdsourcing-oriented fact-checking exploits the “wis-
dom of crowd” to enable normal people to annotate
news content; these annotations are then aggregated
to produce an overall assessment of the news verac-
ity. For example, Fiskkit13 allows users to discuss and
annotate the accuracy of speciﬁc parts of a news arti-
cle. As another example, an anti-fake news bot named
“For real” is a public account in the instant communi-
cation mobile application LINE14, which allows people
to report suspicious news content which is then further
checked by editors.

• Computational-oriented fact-checking aims to provide
an automatic scalable system to classify true and false
claims. Previous computational-oriented fact checking
methods try to solve two majors issues: (i) identifying

11http://www.politifact.com/
12http://www.snopes.com/
13http://ﬁskkit.com
14https://grants.g0v.tw/projects/588fa7b382223f001e022944

check-worthy claims and (ii) discriminating the verac-
ity of fact claims. To identify check-worthy claims, fac-
tual claims in news content are extracted that convey
key statements and viewpoints, facilitating the subse-
quent fact-checking process [31]. Fact-checking for spe-
ciﬁc claims largely relies on external resources to deter-
mine the truthfulness of a particular claim. Two typ-
ical external sources include the open web and struc-
tured knowledge graph. Open web sources are utilized
as references that can be compared with given claims
in terms of both the consistency and frequency [5; 50].
Knowledge graphs are integrated from the linked open
data as a structured network topology, such as DB-
pedia and Google Relation Extraction Corpus. Fact-
checking using a knowledge graph aims to check whether
the claims in news content can be inferred from exist-
ing facts in the knowledge graph [98; 16; 72].

Style-based: Fake news publishers often have malicious
intent to spread distorted and misleading information and
inﬂuence large communities of consumers, requiring partic-
ular writing styles necessary to appeal to and persuade a
wide scope of consumers that is not seen in true news ar-
ticles. Style-based approaches try to detect fake news by
capturing the manipulators in the writing style of news con-
tent. There are mainly two typical categories of style-based
methods: Deception-oriented and Objectivity-oriented.

• Deception-oriented stylometric methods capture the
deceptive statements or claims from news content. The
motivation of deception detection originates from foren-
sic psychology (i.e., Undeutsch Hypothesis) [82] and
various forensic tools including Criteria-based Content
Analysis [84] and Scientiﬁc-based Content Analysis [45]
have been developed. More recently, advanced natu-
ral language processing models are applied to spot de-
ception phases from the following perspectives: Deep
syntax and Rhetorical structure. Deep syntax models
have been implemented using probabilistic context fr-
ree grammers (PCFG), with which sentences can be
transformed into rules that describe the syntax struc-
ture. Based on the PCFG, diﬀerent rules can be de-
veloped for deception detection, such as unlexicalized/
lexicalized production rules and grandparent rules [22].
Rhetorical structure theory can be utilized to capture
the diﬀerences between deceptive and truthful sen-
tences [68]. Deep network models, such as convolu-
tional neural networks (CNN), have also been applied
to classify fake news veracity [90].

• Objectivity-oriented approaches capture style signals
that can indicate a decreased objectivity of news con-
tent and thus the potential to mislead consumers, such
as hyperpartisan styles and yellow-journalism. Hyper-
partisan styles represent extreme behavior in favor of a
particular political party, which often correlates with
a strong motivation to create fake news. Linguistic-
based features can be applied to detect hyperpartisan
articles [62]. Yellow-journalism represents those ar-
ticles that do not contain well-researched news, but
instead rely on eye-catching headlines (i.e., clickbait)
with a propensity for exaggeration, sensationalization,
scare-mongering, etc. Often, news titles will summa-
rize the major viewpoints of the article that the author

wants to convey, and thus misleading and deceptive
clickbait titles can serve as a good indicator for recog-
nizing fake news articles [13].

Social Context Models

3.3.2
The nature of social media provides researchers with ad-
ditional resources to supplement and enhance News Con-
tent Models. Social context models include relevant user
social engagements in the analysis, capturing this auxiliary
information from a variety of perspectives. We can clas-
sify existing approaches for social context modeling into two
categories: Stance-based and Propagation-based. Note that
very few existing fake news detection approaches have uti-
lized social context models. Thus, we also introduce similar
methods for rumor detection using social media, which have
potential application for fake news detection.

Stance-based: Stance-based approaches utilize users’ view-
points from relevant post contents to infer the veracity of
original news articles. The stance of users’ posts can be
represented either explicitly or implicitly. Explicit stances
are direct expressions of emotion or opinion, such as the
“thumbs up” and “thumbs down” reactions expressed in
Facebook. Implicit stances can be automatically extracted
from social media posts. Stance detection is the task of
automatically determining from a post whether the user is
in favor of, neutral toward, or against some target entity,
event, or idea [53]. Previous stance classiﬁcation methods
mainly rely on hand-crafted linguistic or embedding features
on individual posts to predict stances [53; 64]. Topic model
methods, such as latent dirichlet allocation (LDA) can be
applied to learn latent stance from topics [37]. Using these
methods, we can infer the news veracity based on the stance
values of relevant posts. Tacchini et al. proposed to con-
struct a bipartite network of user and Facebook posts using
the “like” stance information [75]; based on this network,
a semi-supervised probabilistic model was used to predict
the likelihood of Facebook posts being hoaxes. Jin et al.
explored topic models to learn latent viewpoint values and
further exploited these viewpoints to learn the credibility of
relevant posts and news content [37].

Propagation-based: Propagation-based approaches for fake
news detection reason about the interrelations of relevant
social media posts to predict news credibility. The basic
assumption is that the credibility of a news event is highly
related to the credibilities of relevant social media posts.
Both homogeneous and heterogeneous credibility networks
can be built for propagation process. Homogeneous credi-
bility networks consist of a single type of entities, such as
post or event [37]. Heterogeneous credibility networks in-
volve diﬀerent types of entities, such as posts, sub-events,
and events [36; 29]. Gupta et al. proposed a PageRank-like
credibility propagation algorithm by encoding users’ credi-
bilities and tweets’ implications on a three layer user-tweet-
event heterogeneous information network. Jin et al. pro-
posed to include news aspects (i.e., latent sub-events), build
a three-layer hierarchical network, and utilize a graph op-
timization framework to infer event credibilities. Recently,
the conﬂicting viewpoint relationships are included to build
a homogeneous credibility network among tweets and guide
the process to evaluate their credibilities [37].

4. ASSESSING DETECTION EFFICACY
In this section, we discuss how to assess the performance of
algorithms for fake news detection. We focus on the avail-
able datasets and evaluation metrics for this task.

4.1 Datasets
Online news can be collected from diﬀerent sources, such
as news agency homepages, search engines, and social me-
dia websites. However, manually determining the verac-
ity of news is a challenging task, usually requiring annota-
tors with domain expertise who performs careful analysis of
claims and additional evidence, context, and reports from
authoritative sources. Generally, news data with annota-
tions can be gathered in the following ways: Expert journal-
ists, Fact-checking websites, Industry detectors, and Crowd-
sourced workers. However, there are no agreed upon bench-
mark datasets for the fake news detection problem. Some
publicly available datasets are listed below:

• BuzzFeedNews 15: This dataset comprises a complete
sample of news published in Facebook from 9 news
agencies over a week close to the 2016 U.S. election
from September 19 to 23 and September 26 and 27.
Every post and the linked article were fact-checked
claim-by-claim by 5 BuzzFeed journalists. This dataset
is further enriched in [62] by adding the linked articles,
It contains
attached media, and relevant metadata.
1,627 articles–826 mainstream, 356 left-wing, and 545
right-wing articles.

• LIAR16: This dataset is collected from fact-checking
It includes
website PolitiFact through its API [90].
12,836 human-labeled short statements, which are sam-
pled from various contexts, such as news releases, TV
or radio interviews, campaign speeches, etc. The labels
for news truthfulness are ﬁne-grained multiple classes:
pants-ﬁre, false, barely-true, half-true, mostly true,
and true.

• BS Detector 17: This dataset is collected from a browser
extension called BS detector developed for checking
news veracity18. It searches all links on a given web-
page for references to unreliable sources by checking
against a manually complied list of domains. The la-
bels are the outputs of BS detector, rather than human
annotators.

• CREDBANK 19: This is a large scale crowdsourced
dataset of approximately 60 million tweets that cover
96 days starting from October 2015. All the tweets are
broken down to be related to over 1,000 news events,
with each event assessed for credibilities by 30 anno-
tators from Amazon Mechanical Turk [52].

these datasets also have speciﬁc limitation that make them
challenging to use for fake news detection. BuzzFeedNews
only contains headlines and text for each news piece and
covers news articles from very few news agencies. LIAR in-
cludes mostly short statements, rather than the entire news
content. Further, these statements are collected from vari-
ous speakers, rather than news publishers, and may include
some claims that are not fake news. BS Detector data is
collected and annotated by using a developed news veracity
checking tool. As the labels have not been properly vali-
dated by human experts, any model trained on this data is
really learning the parameters of BS Detector, rather than
expert-annotated ground truth fake news. Finally, CRED-
BANK was originally collected for tweet credibility assess-
ment, so the tweets in this dataset are not really the social
engagements for speciﬁc news articles.
To address the disadvantages of existing fake news detec-
tion datasets, we have an ongoing project to develop a us-
able dataset for fake news detection on social media. This
dataset, called F akeN ewsN et20, includes all mentioned news
content and social context features with reliable ground truth
fake news labels.

4.2 Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the performance of algorithms for fake news de-
tection problem, various evaluation metrics have been used.
In this subsection, we review the most widely used metrics
for fake news detection. Most existing approaches consider
the fake news problem as a classiﬁcation problem that pre-
dicts whether a news article is fake or not:

• True Positive (TP): when predicted fake news pieces

are actually annotated as fake news;

• True Negative (TN): when predicted true news pieces

are actually annotated as true news;

• False Negative (FN): when predicted true news pieces

are actually annotated as fake news;

• False Positive (FP): when predicted fake news pieces

are actually annotated as true news.

By formulating this as a classiﬁcation problem, we can deﬁne
following metrics,

P recision =

Recall =

|T P |
|T P | + |F P |
|T P |
|T P | + |F N |

F 1 = 2 ·

P recision · Recall
P recision + Recall

Accuracy =

|T P | + |T N |
|T P | + |T N | + |F P | + |F N |

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

In Table 1, we compare these public fake news detection
datasets, highlighting the features that can be extracted
from each dataset. We can see that no existing public dataset
In addition,
can provide all possible features of interest.

15https://github.com/BuzzFeedNews/2016-10-facebook-
fact-check/tree/master/data
16https://www.cs.ucsb.edu/ william/data/liar dataset.zip
17https://www.kaggle.com/mrisdal/fake-news
18https://github.com/bs-detector/bs-detector
19http://compsocial.github.io/CREDBANK-data/

These metrics are commonly used in the machine learning
community and enable us to evaluate the performance of a
classiﬁer from diﬀerent perspectives. Speciﬁcally, accuracy
measures the similarity between predicted fake news and real
fake news. Precision measures the fraction of all detected
fake news that are annotated as fake news, addressing the
important problem of identifying which news is fake. How-
ever, because fake news datasets are often skewed, a high
precision can be easily achieved by making fewer positive

20https://github.com/KaiDMML/FakeNewsNet

Table 1: Comparison of Fake News Detection Datasets.

Features

News Content

Social Context

Dataset

Linguistic Visual User Post Network

BuzzFeedNews

LIAR

BS Detector

CREDBANK

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

predictions. Thus, recall is used to measure the sensitivity,
or the fraction of annotated fake news articles that are pre-
dicted to be fake news. F1 is used to combine precision and
recall, which can provide an overall prediction performance
for fake news detection. Note that for P recision, Recall,
F1, and Accuracy, the higher the value, the better the per-
formance.
The Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve pro-
vides a way of comparing the performance of classiﬁers by
looking at the trade-oﬀ in the False Positive Rate (FPR) and
the True Positive Rate (TPR). To draw the ROC curve, we
plot the FPR on the x axis and and TPR along the y axis.
The ROC curve compares the performance of diﬀerent clas-
siﬁers by changing class distributions via a threshold. TPR
and FPR are deﬁned as follows (note that TPR is the same
as recall deﬁned above):

T P R =

F P R =

|T P |
|T P | + |F N |
|F P |
|F P | + |T N |

(6)

(7)

Based on the ROC curve, we can compute the Area Under
the Curve (AUC) value, which measures the overall perfor-
mance of how likely the classiﬁer is to rank the fake news
higher than any true news. Based on [30], AUC is deﬁned
as below.

AU C =

(cid:80)(n0 + n1 + 1 − ri) − n0(n0 + 1)/2
n0n1

(8)

where ri is the rank of ith fake news piece and n0 (n1) is
It is worth men-
the number of fake (true) news pieces.
tioning that AUC is more statistically consistent and more
discriminating than accuracy [47], and it is usually applied
in an imbalanced classiﬁcation problem, such as fake news
classiﬁcation, where the number of ground truth fake news
articles and and true news articles have a very imbalanced
distribution.

5. RELATED AREAS
In this section, we further discuss areas that are related to
the problem of fake news detection. We aim to point out
the diﬀerences between these areas and fake news detection
by brieﬂy explaining the task goals and highlighting some
popular methods.

5.1 Rumor Classiﬁcation
A rumor can usually be deﬁned as “a piece of circulating
information whose veracity status is yet to be veriﬁed at
the time of spreading” [102]. The function of a rumor is
to make sense of an ambiguous situation, and the truthful-
ness value could be true, false or unveriﬁed. Previous ap-
proaches for rumor analysis focus on four subtasks: rumor

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

detection, rumor tracking, stance classiﬁcation, and verac-
ity classiﬁcation [102]. Speciﬁcally, rumor detection aims to
classify a piece of information as rumor or non-rumor [96;
70]; rumor tracking aims to collect and ﬁlter posts discussing
speciﬁc rumors; rumor stance classiﬁcation determines how
each relevant post is oriented with respect to the rumor’s
veracity; veracity classiﬁcation attempts to predict the ac-
tual truth value of the rumor. The most related task to fake
news detection is the rumor veracity classiﬁcation. Rumor
veracity classiﬁcation relies heavily on the other subtasks,
requiring the stances or opinions can be extracted from rel-
evant posts. These posts are considered as important sen-
sors for determining the veracity of the rumor. Diﬀerent
from rumors, which may include long-term rumors, such as
conspiracy theories, as well as short-term emerging rumors,
fake news refers to information related speciﬁcally to public
news events that can be veriﬁed as false.

5.2 Truth Discovery
Truth discovery is the problem of detecting true facts from
multiple conﬂicting sources [46]. Truth discovery methods
do not explore the fact claims directly, but rely on a collec-
tion of contradicting sources that record the properties of
objects to determine the truth value. Truth discovery aims
to determine the source credibility and object truthfulness
at the same time. The fake news detection problem can
beneﬁt from various aspects of truth discovery approaches
under diﬀerent scenarios. First, the credibility of diﬀerent
news outlets can be modeled to infer the truthfulness of re-
ported news. Second, relevant social media posts can also
be modeled as social response sources to better determine
the truthfulness of claims [56; 93]. However, there are some
other issues that must be considered to apply truth discovery
to fake news detection in social media scenarios. First, most
existing truth discovery methods focus on handling struc-
tured input in the form of Subject-Predicate-Object (SPO)
tuples, while social media data is highly unstructured and
noisy. Second, truth discovery methods can not be well ap-
plied when a fake news article is newly launched and pub-
lished by only a few news outlets because at that point there
is not enough social media posts relevant to it to serve as
additional sources.

5.3 Clickbait Detection
Clickbait is a term commonly used to describe eye-catching
and teaser headlines in online media. Clickbait headlines
create a so-called “curiosity gap”, increasing the likelihood
that reader will click the target link to satisfy their curios-
ity. Existing clickbait detection approaches utilize various
linguistic features extracted from teaser messages, linked
webpages, and tweet meta information [12; 8; 63]. Diﬀer-
ent types of clickbait are categorized, and some of them are
highly correlated with non-factual claims [7]. The underly-

ing motivation of clickbait is usually for click-through rates
and the resultant advertising revenue. Thus, the body text
of clickbait articles are often informally organized and poorly
reasoned. This discrepancy has been used by researchers to
identify the inconsistency between headlines and news con-
tents in an attempt to detect fake news articles21. Even
though not all fake news may include clickbait headlines,
speciﬁc clickbait headlines could serve as an important in-
dicator, and various features can be utilized to help detect
fake news.

5.4 Spammer and Bot Detection
Spammer detection on social media, which aims to cap-
ture malicious users that coordinate among themselves to
launch various attacks, such as spreading ads, disseminat-
ing pornography, delivering viruses, and phishing [44], has
recently attracted wide attention. Existing approaches for
social spammer detection mainly rely on extracting features
from user activities and social network information [35; 95;
33; 34]. In addition, the rise of social bots has also increased
the circulation of false information as they automatically
retweet posts without verifying the facts [23]. The major
challenge brought by social bots is that they can give a false
impression that information is highly popular and endorsed
by many people, which enables the echo chamber eﬀect for
the propagation of fake news. Previous approaches for bot
detection are based on social network information, crowd-
sourcing, and discriminative features [23; 55; 54]. Thus,
both spammer and social bots could provide insights about
target speciﬁc malicious social media accounts that can be
used for fake news detection.

6. OPEN ISSUES AND FUTURE RESEARCH
In this section, we present some open issues in fake news
detection and future research directions. Fake news detec-
tion on social media is a newly emerging research area, so
we aim to point out promising research directions from a
data mining perspective. Speciﬁcally, as shown in Figure 2,
we outline the research directions in four categories: Data-
oriented, Feature-oriented, Model-oriented and Application-
oriented.

Data-oriented: Data-oriented fake news research is fo-
cusing on diﬀerent kinds of data characteristics, such as :
dataset, temporal and psychological. From a dataset per-
spective, we demonstrated that there is no existing bench-
mark dataset that includes resources to extract all relevant
features. A promising direction is to create a comprehensive
and large-scale fake news benchmark dataset, which can be
used by researchers to facilitate further research in this area.
From a temporal perspective, fake news dissemination on so-
cial media demonstrates unique temporal patterns diﬀerent
from true news. Along this line, one interesting problem
is to perform early fake news detection, which aims to give
early alerts of fake news during the dissemination process.
For example, this approach could look at only social media
posts within some time delay of the original post as sources
for news veriﬁcation [37]. Detecting fake news early can help
prevent further propagation on social media. From a psycho-
logical perspective, diﬀerent aspects of fake news have been
qualitatively explored in the social psychology literature [92;

21http://www.fakenewschallenge.org/

58; 59], but quantitative studies to verify these psychological
factors are rather limited. For example, the echo chamber
eﬀect plays an important role for fake news spreading in so-
cial media. Then how to capture echo chamber eﬀects and
how to utilize the pattern for fake news detection in social
media could be an interesting investigation. Moreover, in-
tention detection from news data is promising but limited
as most existing fake news research focus on detecting the
authenticity but ignore the intent aspect of fake news. In-
tention detection is very challenging as the intention is often
explicitly unavailable. Thus.
it’s worth to explore how to
use data mining methods to validate and capture psychol-
ogy intentions.

Feature-oriented: Feature-oriented fake news research aims
to determine eﬀective features for detecting fake news from
multiple data sources. We have demonstrated that there are
two major data sources: news content and social context.
From a news content perspective, we introduced linguistic-
based and visual-based techniques to extract features from
text information. Note that linguistic-based features have
been widely studied for general NLP tasks, such as text clas-
siﬁcation and clustering, and speciﬁc applications such as
author identiﬁcation [32] and deception detection [22], but
the underlying characteristics of fake news have not been
fully understood. Moreover, embedding techniques, such as
word embedding and deep neural networks, are attracting
much attention for textual feature extraction, and has the
potential to learn better representations [90; 87; 88]. In ad-
dition, visual features extracted from images are also shown
to be important indicators for fake news [38]. However, very
limited research has been done to exploit eﬀective visual fea-
tures, including traditional local and global features [61] and
newly emerging deep network-based features [43; 89; 85],
for the fake news detection problem. Recently, it has been
shown that advanced tools can manipulate video footage of
public ﬁgures [80], synthesize high quality videos [74], etc.
Thus, it becomes much more challenging and important to
diﬀerentiate real and fake visual content, and more advanced
visual-based features are needed for this research. From a
social context perspective, we introduced user-based, post-
based, and network-based features. Existing user-based fea-
tures mainly focus on general user proﬁles, rather than dif-
ferentiating account types separately and extracting user-
speciﬁc features. Post-based features can be represented us-
ing other techniques, such as convolutional neural networks
(CNN) [69], to better capture people’s opinions and reac-
tions toward fake news. Images in social media posts can
also be utilized to better understand users’ sentiments [91]
toward news events. Network-based features are extracted
to represent how diﬀerent types of networks are constructed.
It is important to extend this preliminary work to explore
(i) how other networks can be constructed in terms of diﬀer-
ent aspects of relationships among relevant users and posts;
and (ii) other advanced methods of network representations,
such as network embedding [78; 86].

Model-oriented: Model-oriented fake news research opens
the door to building more eﬀective and practical models for
fake news detection. Most previously mentioned approaches
focus on extracting various features, incorporating theses
features into supervised classiﬁcation models, such as na¨ıve
Bayes, decision tree, logistic regression, k nearest neighbor

Figure 2: Future directions and open issues for fake news detection on social media.

(KNN), and support vector machines (SVM), and then se-
lecting the classiﬁer that performs the best [62; 75; 1]. More
research can be done to build more complex and eﬀective
models and to better utilize extracted features, such as ag-
gregation methods, probabilistic methods, ensemble methods,
or projection methods [73]. Speciﬁcally, we think there is
some promising research in the following directions. First,
aggregation methods combine diﬀerent feature representa-
tions into a weighted form and optimize the feature weights.
Second, since fake news may commonly mix true statements
with false claims, it may make more sense to predict the
likelihood of fake news instead of producing a binary value;
probabilistic models predict a probabilistic distribution of
class labels (i.e., fake news versus true news) by assuming
a generative model that pulls from the same distribution as
the original feature space [25]. Third, one of the major chal-
lenges for fake news detection is the fact that each feature,
such as source credibility, news content style, or social re-
sponse, has some limitations to directly predict fake news on
its own. Ensemble methods build a conjunction of several
weak classiﬁers to learn a strong classiﬁer that is more suc-
cessful than any individual classiﬁer alone; ensembles have
been widely applied to various applications in the machine
learning literature [20]. It may be beneﬁcial to build ensem-
ble models as news content and social context features each
have supplementary information that has the potential to
boost fake news detection performance. Finally, fake news
content or social context information may be noisy in the
raw feature space; projection methods refer to approaches
that lean projection functions to map between original fea-
ture spaces (e.g., news content features and social context
features) and the latent feature spaces that may be more
useful for classiﬁcation.
Moreover, most existing approaches are supervised, which
requires a pre-annotated fake news ground truth dataset
to train a model. However, obtaining a reliable fake news
dataset is very time and labor intensive, as the process of-
ten requires expert annotators to perform careful analysis of
claims and additional evidence, context, and reports from
authoritative sources. Thus, it is also important to con-
sider scenarios where limited or no labeled fake news pieces
are available in which semi-supervised or unsupervised mod-
els can be applied. While the models created by super-

vised classiﬁcation methods may be more accurate given a
well-curated ground truth dataset for training, unsupervised
models can be more practical because unlabeled datasets are
easier to obtain.

Application-oriented: Application-oriented fake news re-
search encompass research that goes into other areas beyond
fake news detection. We propose two major directions along
these lines: fake news diﬀusion and fake news intervention.
Fake news diﬀusion characterizes the diﬀusion paths and
patterns of fake news on social media sites. Some early re-
search has shown that true information and misinformation
follow diﬀerent patterns when propagating in online social
networks [18; 51]. Similarly, the diﬀusion of fake news in
social media demonstrates its own characteristics that need
further investigation, such as social dimensions, life cycle,
spreader identiﬁcation, etc. Social dimensions refer to the
heterogeneity and weak dependency of social connections
within diﬀerent social communities. Users’ perceptions of
fake news pieces are highly aﬀected by their like-minded
friends in social media (i.e., echo chambers), while the de-
gree diﬀers along diﬀerent social dimensions. Thus, it is
worth exploring why and how diﬀerent social dimensions
play a role in spreading fake news in terms of diﬀerent top-
ics, such as political, education, sports, etc. The fake news
diﬀusion process also has diﬀerent stages in terms of peo-
ple’s attentions and reactions as time goes by, resulting in
a unique life cycle. Research has shown that breaking news
and in-depth news demonstrate diﬀerent life cycles in social
media [10]. Studying the life cycle of fake news will provide
deeper understanding of how particular stories “go viral”
from normal public discourse. Tracking the life cycle of fake
news on social media requires recording essential trajectories
of fake news diﬀusion in general [71], as well as further in-
vestigations of the process for speciﬁc fake news pieces, such
as graph-based models and evolution-based models [27]. In
addition, identifying key spreaders of fake news is crucial to
mitigate the diﬀusion scope in social media. Note that key
spreaders can be categorized in two ways, i.e., stance and
authenticity. Along the stance dimensions, spreaders can
either be (i) clariﬁers, who propose skeptical and opposing
viewpoints towards fake news and try to clarify them; or (ii)
persuaders, who spread fake news with supporting opinions

to persuade others to believe it. In this sense, it is impor-
tant to explore how to detect clariﬁers and persuaders and
better use them to control the dissemination of fake news.
From an authenticity perspective, spreaders could be either
human, bot, or cyborg. Social bots have been used to inten-
tionally spread fake news in social media, which motivates
further research to better characterize and detect malicious
accounts designed for propaganda.
Finally, we also propose further research into fake news in-
tervention, which aims to reduce the eﬀects of fake news
by proactive intervention methods that minimize the spread
scope or reactive intervention methods after fake news goes
viral. Proactive fake news intervention methods try to (i)
remove malicious accounts that spread fake news or fake
news itself to isolate it from future consumers; (ii) immu-
nize users with true news to change the belief of users that
may already have been aﬀected by fake news. There is recent
research that attempts to use content-based immunization
and network-based immunization methods in misinforma-
tion intervention [94; 97]. One approach uses a multivariate
Hawkes process to model both true news and fake news and
mitigate the spreading of fake news in real-time [21]. The
aforementioned spreader detection techniques can also be
applied to target certain users (e.g., persuaders) in social
media to stop spreading fake news, or other users (e.g. clar-
iﬁers) to maximize the spread of corresponding true news.

7. CONCLUSION
With the increasing popularity of social media, more and
more people consume news from social media instead of tra-
ditional news media. However, social media has also been
used to spread fake news, which has strong negative impacts
on individual users and broader society. In this article, we
explored the fake news problem by reviewing existing lit-
erature in two phases: characterization and detection.
In
the characterization phase, we introduced the basic concepts
and principles of fake news in both traditional media and so-
cial media. In the detection phase, we reviewed existing fake
news detection approaches from a data mining perspective,
including feature extraction and model construction. We
also further discussed the datasets, evaluation metrics, and
promising future directions in fake news detection research
and expand the ﬁeld to other applications.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by, or in part
by, the ONR grant N00014-16-1-2257.

9. REFERENCES

[1] Sadia Afroz, Michael Brennan, and Rachel Green-
stadt. Detecting hoaxes, frauds, and deception in writ-
ing style online. In ISSP’12.

[2] Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow. Social media
and fake news in the 2016 election. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.

[3] Solomon E Asch and H Guetzkow. Eﬀects of group
pressure upon the modiﬁcation and distortion of judg-
ments. Groups, leadership, and men, pages 222–236,
1951.

[4] Meital Balmas. When fake news becomes real: Com-
bined exposure to multiple news sources and political
attitudes of ineﬃcacy, alienation, and cynicism. Com-
munication Research, 41(3):430–454, 2014.

[5] Michele Banko, Michael J Cafarella, Stephen Soder-
land, Matthew Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. Open
information extraction from the web. In IJCAI’07.

[6] Alessandro Bessi and Emilio Ferrara. Social bots dis-
tort the 2016 us presidential election online discussion.
First Monday, 21(11), 2016.

[7] Prakhar Biyani, Kostas Tsioutsiouliklis, and John
Blackmer. ” 8 amazing secrets for getting more clicks”:
Detecting clickbaits in news streams using article in-
formality. In AAAI’16.

[8] Jonas Nygaard Blom and Kenneth Reinecke Hansen.
Click bait: Forward-reference as lure in online news
headlines. Journal of Pragmatics, 76:87–100, 2015.

[9] Paul R Brewer, Dannagal Goldthwaite Young, and
Michelle Morreale. The impact of real news about
fake news: Intertextual processes and political satire.
International Journal of Public Opinion Research,
25(3):323–343, 2013.

[10] Carlos Castillo, Mohammed El-Haddad, J¨urgen Pfef-
fer, and Matt Stempeck. Characterizing the life cycle
of online news stories using social media reactions. In
CSCW’14.

[11] Carlos Castillo, Marcelo Mendoza, and Barbara
In

Information credibility on twitter.

Poblete.
WWW’11.

[12] Abhijnan Chakraborty, Bhargavi Paranjape, Sourya
Kakarla, and Niloy Ganguly. Stop clickbait: Detect-
ing and preventing clickbaits in online news media. In
ASONAM’16.

[13] Yimin Chen, Niall J Conroy, and Victoria L Rubin.
Misleading online content: Recognizing clickbait as
false news. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM on Work-
shop on Multimodal Deception Detection, pages 15–19.
ACM, 2015.

[14] Justin Cheng, Michael Bernstein, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, and Jure Leskovec. Anyone can be-
come a troll: Causes of trolling behavior in online dis-
cussions. In CSCW ’17.

[15] Zi Chu, Steven Gianvecchio, Haining Wang, and
Sushil Jajodia. Detecting automation of twitter ac-
counts: Are you a human, bot, or cyborg?
IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
9(6):811–824, 2012.

[16] Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia, Prashant Shiralkar,
Luis M Rocha, Johan Bollen, Filippo Menczer, and
Alessandro Flammini. Computational fact checking
from knowledge networks. PloS one, 10(6):e0128193,
2015.

[17] Niall J Conroy, Victoria L Rubin, and Yimin Chen.
Automatic deception detection: Methods for ﬁnding
fake news. Proceedings of the Association for Infor-
mation Science and Technology, 52(1):1–4, 2015.

[18] Michela Del Vicario, Alessandro Bessi, Fabiana Zollo,
Fabio Petroni, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli, H Eu-

gene Stanley, and Walter Quattrociocchi. The spread-
ing of misinformation online. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 113(3):554–559, 2016.

[19] Michela Del Vicario, Gianna Vivaldo, Alessandro
Bessi, Fabiana Zollo, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli,
and Walter Quattrociocchi. Echo chambers: Emo-
tional contagion and group polarization on facebook.
Scientiﬁc Reports, 6, 2016.

[20] Thomas G Dietterich et al. Ensemble methods in ma-
chine learning. Multiple classiﬁer systems, 1857:1–15,
2000.

[21] Mehrdad Farajtabar, Jiachen Yang, Xiaojing Ye,
Huan Xu, Rakshit Trivedi, Elias Khalil, Shuang Li,
Le Song, and Hongyuan Zha. Fake news mitigation
via point process based intervention. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.07823, 2017.

[22] Song Feng, Ritwik Banerjee, and Yejin Choi. Syntactic
stylometry for deception detection. In ACL’12.

[23] Emilio Ferrara, Onur Varol, Clayton Davis, Filippo
Menczer, and Alessandro Flammini. The rise of so-
cial bots. Communications of the ACM, 59(7):96–104,
2016.

[24] Johannes F¨urnkranz. A study using n-gram features
for text categorization. Austrian Research Institute for
Artiﬁcal Intelligence, 3(1998):1–10, 1998.

[25] Ashutosh Garg and Dan Roth. Understanding proba-

bilistic classiﬁers. ECML’01.

[26] Matthew Gentzkow, Jesse M Shapiro, and Daniel F
Stone. Media bias in the marketplace: Theory. Tech-
nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
2014.

[27] Adrien Guille, Hakim Hacid, Cecile Favre, and
Djamel A Zighed. Information diﬀusion in online social
networks: A survey. ACM Sigmod Record, 42(2):17–
28, 2013.

[28] Aditi Gupta, Hemank Lamba, Ponnurangam Ku-
maraguru, and Anupam Joshi. Faking sandy: charac-
terizing and identifying fake images on twitter during
hurricane sandy. In WWW’13.

[29] Manish Gupta, Peixiang Zhao, and Jiawei Han. Eval-
uating event credibility on twitter. In PSDM’12.

[30] David J Hand and Robert J Till. A simple generalisa-
tion of the area under the roc curve for multiple class
classiﬁcation problems. Machine learning, 2001.

[31] Naeemul Hassan, Chengkai Li, and Mark Tremayne.
Detecting check-worthy factual claims in presidential
debates. In CIKM’15.

[32] John Houvardas and Efstathios Stamatatos. N-gram
feature selection for authorship identiﬁcation. Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence: Methodology, Systems, and Applica-
tions, pages 77–86, 2006.

[33] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, Huiji Gao, and Huan Liu. So-
cial spammer detection with sentiment information. In
ICDM’14.

[34] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, and Huan Liu. Online social

spammer detection. In AAAI’14, pages 59–65, 2014.

[35] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, Yanchao Zhang, and Huan Liu.

Social spammer detection in microblogging. In IJ-
CAI’13.

[36] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Yongdong
Zhang. News credibility evaluation on microblog with
a hierarchical propagation model. In ICDM’14.

[37] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yongdong Zhang, and Jiebo
Luo. News veriﬁcation by exploiting conﬂicting social
viewpoints in microblogs. In AAAI’16.

[38] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yongdong Zhang, Jianshe Zhou,
and Qi Tian. Novel visual and statistical image fea-
tures for microblogs news veriﬁcation. IEEE Transac-
tions on Multimedia, 19(3):598–608, 2017.

[39] Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. Prospect the-
ory: An analysis of decision under risk. Economet-
rica: Journal of the econometric society, pages 263–
291, 1979.

[40] Jean-Noel Kapferer. Rumors: Uses, Interpretation

and Necessity. Routledge, 2017.

[41] David O Klein and Joshua R Wueller. Fake news: A

legal perspective. 2017.

[42] Sejeong Kwon, Meeyoung Cha, Kyomin Jung, Wei
Chen, and Yajun Wang. Prominent features of rumor
propagation in online social media. In ICDM’13, pages
1103–1108. IEEE, 2013.

[43] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoﬀrey Hinton.
Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444, 2015.

[44] Kyumin Lee, James Caverlee, and Steve Webb. Un-
covering social spammers: social honeypots+ machine
learning. In SIGIR’10.

[45] Tony Lesce. Scan: Deception detection by scientiﬁc
content analysis. Law and Order, 38(8):3–6, 1990.

[46] Yaliang Li, Jing Gao, Chuishi Meng, Qi Li, Lu Su,
Bo Zhao, Wei Fan, and Jiawei Han. A survey on
truth discovery. ACM Sigkdd Explorations Newsletter,
17(2):1–16, 2016.

[47] Charles X Ling, Jin Huang, and Harry Zhang. Auc: a
statistically consistent and more discriminating mea-
sure than accuracy.

[48] Jing Ma, Wei Gao, Prasenjit Mitra, Sejeong Kwon,
Bernard J Jansen, Kam-Fai Wong, and Meeyoung
Cha. Detecting rumors from microblogs with recur-
rent neural networks.

[49] Jing Ma, Wei Gao, Zhongyu Wei, Yueming Lu, and
Kam-Fai Wong. Detect rumors using time series of so-
cial context information on microblogging websites. In
CIKM’15.

[50] Amr Magdy and Nayer Wanas. Web-based statistical
fact checking of textual documents. In Proceedings of
the 2nd international workshop on Search and mining
user-generated contents, pages 103–110. ACM, 2010.

[51] Filippo Menczer. The spread of misinformation in so-

cial media. In WWW’16.

[52] Tanushree Mitra and Eric Gilbert. Credbank: A large-
scale social media corpus with associated credibility
annotations. In ICWSM’15.

[53] Saif M Mohammad, Parinaz Sobhani, and Svet-
lana Kiritchenko. Stance and sentiment in tweets.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT),
17(3):26, 2017.

Huan Liu. Leveraging the implicit structure within so-
cial media for emergent rumor detection. In CIKM’15.

[54] Fred Morstatter, Harsh Dani, Justin Sampson, and
Huan Liu. Can one tamper with the sample api?: To-
ward neutralizing bias from spam and bot content. In
WWW’16.

[55] Fred Morstatter, Liang Wu, Tahora H Nazer, Kath-
leen M Carley, and Huan Liu. A new approach to bot
detection: Striking the balance between precision and
recall. In ASONAM’16.

[56] Subhabrata Mukherjee and Gerhard Weikum. Lever-
aging joint interactions for credibility analysis in news
communities. In CIKM’15.

[57] Eni Mustafaraj and Panagiotis Takis Metaxas. The
fake news spreading plague: Was it preventable?
arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.06988, 2017.

[58] Raymond S Nickerson. Conﬁrmation bias: A ubiqui-
tous phenomenon in many guises. Review of general
psychology, 2(2):175, 1998.

[59] Brendan Nyhan and Jason Reiﬂer. When corrections
fail: The persistence of political misperceptions. Po-
litical Behavior, 32(2):303–330, 2010.

[60] Christopher Paul and Miriam Matthews. The russian

ﬁrehose of falsehood propaganda model.

[61] Dong ping Tian et al. A review on image feature ex-
traction and representation techniques. International
Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering,
8(4):385–396, 2013.

[62] Martin Potthast, Johannes Kiesel, Kevin Reinartz,
Janek Bevendorﬀ, and Benno Stein. A stylometric in-
quiry into hyperpartisan and fake news. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.05638, 2017.

[63] Martin Potthast, Sebastian K¨opsel, Benno Stein, and
Matthias Hagen. Clickbait detection. In European
Conference on Information Retrieval, pages 810–817.
Springer, 2016.

[64] Vahed Qazvinian, Emily Rosengren, Dragomir R
Radev, and Qiaozhu Mei. Rumor has it: Identifying
misinformation in microblogs. In EMNLP’11.

[65] Walter Quattrociocchi, Antonio Scala, and Cass R

Sunstein. Echo chambers on facebook. 2016.

[66] Victoria L Rubin, Yimin Chen, and Niall J Conroy.
Deception detection for news: three types of fakes.
Proceedings of the Association for Information Science
and Technology, 52(1):1–4, 2015.

[67] Victoria L Rubin, Niall J Conroy, Yimin Chen, and
Sarah Cornwell. Fake news or truth? using satirical
cues to detect potentially misleading news. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 7–17, 2016.

[68] Victoria L Rubin and Tatiana Lukoianova. Truth and
deception at the rhetorical structure level. Journal of
the Association for Information Science and Technol-
ogy, 66(5):905–917, 2015.

[69] Natali Ruchansky, Sungyong Seo, and Yan Liu. Csi:
A hybrid deep model for fake news. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.06959, 2017.

[70] Justin Sampson, Fred Morstatter, Liang Wu, and

[71] Chengcheng Shao, Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia,
Alessandro Flammini, and Filippo Menczer. Hoaxy:
A platform for tracking online misinformation. In
WWW’16.

[72] Baoxu Shi and Tim Weninger. Fact checking in het-
erogeneous information networks. In WWW’16.

[73] Kai Shu, Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Reza Zafarani,
and Huan Liu. User identity linkage across online so-
cial networks: A review. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
Newsletter, 18(2):5–17, 2017.

[74] Supasorn Suwajanakorn, Steven M Seitz, and Ira
Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. Synthesizing obama: learn-
ing lip sync from audio. ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics (TOG), 36(4):95, 2017.

[75] Eugenio Tacchini, Gabriele Ballarin, Marco L
Della Vedova, Stefano Moret, and Luca de Alfaro.
Some like it hoax: Automated fake news detection
in social networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.07506,
2017.

[76] Henri Tajfel and John C Turner. An integrative theory
of intergroup conﬂict. The social psychology of inter-
group relations, 33(47):74, 1979.

[77] Henri Tajfel and John C Turner. The social identity

theory of intergroup behavior. 2004.

[78] Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang,
Jun Yan, and Qiaozhu Mei. Line: Large-scale infor-
mation network embedding. In WWW’15.

[79] Jiliang Tang, Yi Chang, and Huan Liu. Mining social
media with social theories: a survey. ACM SIGKDD
Explorations Newsletter, 15(2):20–29, 2014.

[80] Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, Marc Stamminger,
Christian Theobalt, and Matthias Nießner. Face2face:
Real-time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos.
In CVPR’16.

[81] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Advances in
prospect theory: Cumulative representation of uncer-
tainty. Journal of Risk and uncertainty, 5(4):297–323,
1992.

[82] Udo Undeutsch. Beurteilung der glaubhaftigkeit von
aussagen. Handbuch der psychologie, 11:26–181, 1967.

[83] Andreas Vlachos and Sebastian Riedel. Fact checking:
Task deﬁnition and dataset construction. ACL’14.

[84] Aldert Vrij. Criteria-based content analysis: A quali-
tative review of the ﬁrst 37 studies. Psychology, Public
Policy, and Law, 11(1):3, 2005.

[85] Suhang Wang, Charu Aggarwal, Jiliang Tang, and
Huan Liu. Attributed signed network embedding. In
CIKM’17.

[86] Suhang Wang,

Jiliang Tang, Charu Aggarwal,
Yi Chang, and Huan Liu. Signed network embedding
in social media. In SDM’17.

[87] Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Charu Aggarwal, and
Huan Liu. Linked document embedding for classiﬁca-
tion. In CIKM’16.

[88] Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Fred Morstatter, and
Huan Liu. Paired restricted boltzmann machine for
linked data. In CIKM’16.

[96] Liang Wu, Jundong Li, Xia Hu, and Huan Liu. Glean-
ing wisdom from the past: Early detection of emerging
rumors in social media. In SDM’17.

[89] Suhang Wang, Yilin Wang, Jiliang Tang, Kai Shu,
Suhas Ranganath, and Huan Liu. What your images
reveal: Exploiting visual contents for point-of-interest
recommendation. In WWW’17.

[90] William Yang Wang. ” liar, liar pants on ﬁre”: A
new benchmark dataset for fake news detection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.00648, 2017.

[91] Yilin Wang, Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Huan Liu,
and Baoxin Li. Unsupervised sentiment analysis for
social media images. In IJCAI, pages 2378–2379, 2015.

[92] Andrew Ward, L Ross, E Reed, E Turiel, and
T Brown. Naive realism in everyday life: Implications
for social conﬂict and misunderstanding. Values and
knowledge, pages 103–135, 1997.

[93] Gerhard Weikum. What computers should know,
shouldn’t know, and shouldn’t believe. In WWW’17.

[94] L Wu, F Morstatter, X Hu, and H Liu. Chapter 5:

Mining misinformation in social media, 2016.

[95] Liang Wu, Xia Hu, Fred Morstatter, and Huan Liu.
Adaptive spammer detection with sparse group mod-
eling. In ICWSM’17.

[97] Liang Wu, Fred Morstatter, Xia Hu, and Huan Liu.
Mining misinformation in social media. Big Data in
Complex and Social Networks, pages 123–152, 2016.

[98] You Wu, Pankaj K Agarwal, Chengkai Li, Jun Yang,
and Cong Yu. Toward computational fact-checking.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 7(7):589–600,
2014.

[99] Fan Yang, Yang Liu, Xiaohui Yu, and Min Yang. Au-
tomatic detection of rumor on sina weibo. In Proceed-
ings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Mining Data
Semantics, page 13. ACM, 2012.

[100] Robert B Zajonc. Attitudinal eﬀects of mere exposure.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 9(2p2):1,
1968.

[101] Robert B Zajonc. Mere exposure: A gateway to the
subliminal. Current directions in psychological science,
10(6):224–228, 2001.

[102] Arkaitz Zubiaga, Ahmet Aker, Kalina Bontcheva,
Maria Liakata, and Rob Procter. Detection and res-
olution of rumours in social media: A survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.00656, 2017.

Fake News Detection on Social Media:
A Data Mining Perspective

Kai Shu†, Amy Sliva‡, Suhang Wang†, Jiliang Tang (cid:92), and Huan Liu†
†Computer Science & Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
‡Charles River Analytics, Cambridge, MA, USA
(cid:92)Computer Science & Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
†{kai.shu,suhang.wang,huan.liu}@asu.edu,
‡asliva@cra.com, (cid:92) tangjili@msu.edu

7
1
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
 
 
]
I
S
.
s
c
[
 
 
3
v
7
6
9
1
0
.
8
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Social media for news consumption is a double-edged sword.
On the one hand, its low cost, easy access, and rapid dissem-
ination of information lead people to seek out and consume
news from social media. On the other hand, it enables the
wide spread of “fake news”, i.e., low quality news with in-
tentionally false information. The extensive spread of fake
news has the potential for extremely negative impacts on
individuals and society. Therefore, fake news detection on
social media has recently become an emerging research that
is attracting tremendous attention. Fake news detection
on social media presents unique characteristics and chal-
lenges that make existing detection algorithms from tradi-
tional news media ineﬀective or not applicable. First, fake
news is intentionally written to mislead readers to believe
false information, which makes it diﬃcult and nontrivial to
detect based on news content; therefore, we need to include
auxiliary information, such as user social engagements on
social media, to help make a determination. Second, ex-
ploiting this auxiliary information is challenging in and of
itself as users’ social engagements with fake news produce
data that is big, incomplete, unstructured, and noisy. Be-
cause the issue of fake news detection on social media is both
challenging and relevant, we conducted this survey to fur-
ther facilitate research on the problem. In this survey, we
present a comprehensive review of detecting fake news on
social media, including fake news characterizations on psy-
chology and social theories, existing algorithms from a data
mining perspective, evaluation metrics and representative
datasets. We also discuss related research areas, open prob-
lems, and future research directions for fake news detection
on social media.

INTRODUCTION

1.
As an increasing amount of our lives is spent interacting
online through social media platforms, more and more peo-
ple tend to seek out and consume news from social media
rather than traditional news organizations. The reasons for
this change in consumption behaviors are inherent in the
nature of these social media platforms: (i) it is often more
timely and less expensive to consume news on social media
compared with traditional news media, such as newspapers
or television; and (ii) it is easier to further share, comment

on, and discuss the news with friends or other readers on
social media. For example, 62 percent of U.S. adults get
news on social media in 2016, while in 2012, only 49 per-
cent reported seeing news on social media1.
It was also
found that social media now outperforms television as the
major news source2. Despite the advantages provided by
social media, the quality of news on social media is lower
than traditional news organizations. However, because it
is cheap to provide news online and much faster and easier
to disseminate through social media, large volumes of fake
news, i.e., those news articles with intentionally false infor-
mation, are produced online for a variety of purposes, such
as ﬁnancial and political gain. It was estimated that over 1
million tweets are related to fake news “Pizzagate”3 by the
end of the presidential election. Given the prevalence of this
new phenomenon, “Fake news” was even named the word of
the year by the Macquarie dictionary in 2016.
The extensive spread of fake news can have a serious nega-
tive impact on individuals and society. First, fake news can
break the authenticity balance of the news ecosystem. For
example, it is evident that the most popular fake news was
even more widely spread on Facebook than the most pop-
ular authentic mainstream news during the U.S. 2016 pres-
ident election4. Second, fake news intentionally persuades
consumers to accept biased or false beliefs. Fake news is
usually manipulated by propagandists to convey political
messages or inﬂuence. For example, some report shows that
Russia has created fake accounts and social bots to spread
false stories5. Third, fake news changes the way people in-
terpret and respond to real news. For example, some fake
news was just created to trigger people’s distrust and make
them confused, impeding their abilities to diﬀerentiate what
is true from what is not6. To help mitigate the negative ef-
fects caused by fake news–both to beneﬁt the public and
the news ecosystem–It’s critical that we develop methods to
automatically detect fake news on social media.

1http://www.journalism.org/2016/05/26/news-use-across-
social-media-platforms-2016/
2http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-36528256
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pizzagate conspiracy theory
4https://www.buzzfeed.com/craigsilverman/viral-
fake-election-news-outperformed-real-news-on-
facebook?utm term=.nrg0WA1VP0#.gjJyKapW5y
5http://time.com/4783932/inside-russia-social-media-war-
america/
6https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/28/opinion/fake-
news-and-the-internet-shell-game.html? r=0

Detecting fake news on social media poses several new and
challenging research problems. Though fake news itself is
not a new problem–nations or groups have been using the
news media to execute propaganda or inﬂuence operations
for centuries–the rise of web-generated news on social me-
dia makes fake news a more powerful force that challenges
traditional journalistic norms. There are several character-
istics of this problem that make it uniquely challenging for
automated detection. First, fake news is intentionally writ-
ten to mislead readers, which makes it nontrivial to detect
simply based on news content. The content of fake news is
rather diverse in terms of topics, styles and media platforms,
and fake news attempts to distort truth with diverse lin-
guistic styles while simultaneously mocking true news. For
example, fake news may cite true evidence within the in-
correct context to support a non-factual claim [22]. Thus,
existing hand-crafted and data-speciﬁc textual features are
generally not suﬃcient for fake news detection. Other aux-
iliary information must also be applied to improve detec-
tion, such as knowledge base and user social engagements.
Second, exploiting this auxiliary information actually leads
to another critical challenge: the quality of the data itself.
Fake news is usually related to newly emerging, time-critical
events, which may not have been properly veriﬁed by exist-
ing knowledge bases due to the lack of corroborating ev-
idence or claims.
In addition, users’ social engagements
with fake news produce data that is big, incomplete, un-
structured, and noisy [79]. Eﬀective methods to diﬀerenti-
ate credible users, extract useful post features and exploit
network interactions are an open area of research and need
further investigations.
In this article, we present an overview of fake news detection
and discuss promising research directions. The key motiva-
tions of this survey are summarized as follows:

• Fake news on social media has been occurring for sev-
eral years; however, there is no agreed upon deﬁnition
of the term “fake news”. To better guide the future
directions of fake news detection research, appropriate
clariﬁcations are necessary.

• Social media has proved to be a powerful source for
fake news dissemination. There are some emerging
patterns that can be utilized for fake news detection
in social media. A review on existing fake news detec-
tion methods under various social media scenarios can
provide a basic understanding on the state-of-the-art
fake news detection methods.

• Fake news detection on social media is still in the early
age of development, and there are still many challeng-
ing issues that need further investigations. It is neces-
sary to discuss potential research directions that can
improve fake news detection and mitigation capabili-
ties.

To facilitate research in fake news detection on social me-
dia, in this survey we will review two aspects of the fake
news detection problem: characterization and detection. As
shown in Figure 1, we will ﬁrst describe the background of
the fake news detection problem using theories and prop-
erties from psychology and social studies; then we present
the detection approaches. Our major contributions of this
survey are summarized as follows:

• We discuss the narrow and broad deﬁnitions of fake
news that cover most existing deﬁnitions in the litera-
ture and further present the unique characteristics of
fake news on social media and its implications com-
pared with the traditional media;

• We give an overview of existing fake news detection
methods with a principled way to group representative
methods into diﬀerent categories; and

• We discuss several open issues and provide future di-

rections of fake news detection in social media.

The remainder of this survey is organized as follows.
In
Section 2, we present the deﬁnition of fake news and char-
acterize it by comparing diﬀerent theories and properties in
both traditional and social media. In Section 3, we continue
to formally deﬁne the fake news detection problem and sum-
marize the methods to detect fake news. In Section 4, we
discuss the datasets and evaluation metrics used by existing
methods. We brieﬂy introduce areas related to fake news de-
tection on social media in Section 5. Finally, we discuss the
open issues and future directions in Section 6 and conclude
this survey in Section 7.

2. FAKE NEWS CHARACTERIZATION
In this section, we introduce the basic social and psychologi-
cal theories related to fake news and discuss more advanced
patterns introduced by social media. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
discuss various deﬁnitions of fake news and diﬀerentiate re-
lated concepts that are usually misunderstood as fake news.
We then describe diﬀerent aspects of fake news on tradi-
tional media and the new patterns found on social media.

2.1 Deﬁnitions of Fake News
Fake news has existed for a very long time, nearly the same
amount of time as news began to circulate widely after the
printing press was invented in 14397. However, there is no
agreed deﬁnition of the term “fake news”. Therefore, we ﬁrst
discuss and compare some widely used deﬁnitions of fake
news in the existing literature, and provide our deﬁnition of
fake news that will be used for the remainder of this survey.
A narrow deﬁnition of fake news is news articles that are in-
tentionally and veriﬁably false and could mislead readers [2].
There are two key features of this deﬁnition: authenticity
and intent. First, fake news includes false information that
can be veriﬁed as such. Second, fake news is created with
dishonest intention to mislead consumers. This deﬁnition
has been widely adopted in recent studies [57; 17; 62; 41].
Broader deﬁnitions of fake news focus on the either authen-
ticity or intent of the news content. Some papers regard
satire news as fake news since the contents are false even
though satire is often entertainment-oriented and reveals its
own deceptiveness to the consumers [67; 4; 37; 9]. Other
literature directly treats deceptive news as fake news [66],
which includes serious fabrications, hoaxes, and satires.
In this article, we use the narrow deﬁnition of fake news.
Formally, we state this deﬁnition as follows,

Definition 1 (Fake News) Fake news is a news article
that is intentionally and veriﬁably false.

7http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/12/fake-
news-history-long-violent-214535

Figure 1: Fake news on social media: from characterization to detection.

The reasons for choosing this narrow deﬁnition are three-
folds. First, the underlying intent of fake news provides both
theoretical and practical value that enables a deeper under-
standing and analysis of this topic. Second, any techniques
for truth veriﬁcation that apply to the narrow conception
of fake news can also be applied to under the broader deﬁ-
nition. Third, this deﬁnition is able to eliminate the ambi-
guities between fake news and related concepts that are not
considered in this article. The following concepts are not
fake news according to our deﬁnition: (1) satire news with
proper context, which has no intent to mislead or deceive
consumers and is unlikely to be mis-perceived as factual;
(2) rumors that did not originate from news events; (3) con-
spiracy theories, which are diﬃcult verify as true or false;
(4) misinformation that is created unintentionally; and (5)
hoaxes that are only motivated by fun or to scam targeted
individuals.

2.2 Fake News on Traditional News Media
Fake news itself is not a new problem. The media ecology
of fake news has been changing over time from newsprint to
radio/television and, recently, online news and social media.
We denote “traditional fake news” as the fake news problem
before social media had important eﬀects on its production
and dissemination. Next, we will describe several psycholog-
ical and social science foundations that describe the impact
of fake news at both the individual and social information
ecosystem levels.

Psychological Foundations of Fake News. Humans are
naturally not very good at diﬀerentiating between real and
fake news. There are several psychological and cognitive
theories that can explain this phenomenon and the inﬂuen-
tial power of fake news. Traditional fake news mainly tar-
gets consumers by exploiting their individual vulnerabilities.
There are two major factors which make consumers natu-
rally vulnerable to fake news: (i) Na¨ıve Realism: consumers
tend to believe that their perceptions of reality are the only
accurate views, while others who disagree are regarded as
uninformed, irrational, or biased [92]; and (ii) Conﬁrmation
Bias: consumers prefer to receive information that conﬁrms
their existing views [58]. Due to these cognitive biases inher-
ent in human nature, fake news can often be perceived as real
by consumers. Moreover, once the misperception is formed,
it is very hard to correct it. Psychology studies shows that
correction of false information (e.g., fake news) by the pre-
sentation of true, factual information is not only unhelpful

to reduce misperceptions, but sometimes may even increase
the misperceptions, especially among ideological groups [59].

Social Foundations of the Fake News Ecosystem.
Considering the entire news consumption ecosystem, we can
also describe some of the social dynamics that contribute to
the proliferation of fake news. Prospect theory describes
decision making as a process by which people make choices
based on the relative gains and losses as compared to their
current state [39; 81]. This desire for maximizing the reward
of a decision applies to social gains as well, for instance,
continued acceptance by others in a user’s immediate social
network. As described by social identity theory [76; 77] and
normative inﬂuence theory [3; 40], this preference for social
acceptance and aﬃrmation is essential to a person’s identity
and self-esteem, making users likely to choose “socially safe”
options when consuming and disseminating news informa-
tion, following the norms established in the community even
if the news being shared is fake news.
This rational theory of fake news interactions can be mod-
eled from an economic game theoretical perspective [26] by
formulating the news generation and consumption cycle as a
two-player strategy game. For explaining fake news, we as-
sume there are two kinds of key players in the information
ecosystem: publisher and consumer. The process of news
publishing is modeled as a mapping from original signal s
to resultant news report a with an eﬀect of distortion bias
b, i.e., s b−→ a, where b = [−1, 0, 1] indicates [lef t, no, right]
biases take eﬀects on news publishing process. Intuitively,
this is capturing the degree to which a news article may be
biased or distorted to produce fake news. The utility for
the publisher stems from two perspectives: (i) short-term
utility: the incentive to maximize proﬁt, which is positively
correlated with the number of consumers reached; (ii) long-
term utility: their reputation in terms of news authenticity.
Utility of consumers consists of two parts: (i) information
utility: obtaining true and unbiased information (usually ex-
tra investment cost needed); (ii) psychology utility: receiving
news that satisﬁes their prior opinions and social needs, e.g.,
conﬁrmation bias and prospect theory. Both publisher and
consumer try to maximize their overall utilities in this strat-
egy game of the news consumption process. We can capture
the fact that fake news happens when the short-term utility
dominates a publisher’s overall utility and psychology utility
dominates the consumer’s overall utility, and an equilibrium
is maintained. This explains the social dynamics that lead
to an information ecosystem where fake news can thrive.

2.3 Fake News on Social Media
In this subsection, we will discuss some unique character-
istics of fake news on social media. Speciﬁcally, we will
highlight the key features of fake news that are enabled by
social media. Note that the aforementioned characteristics
of traditional fake news are also applicable to social media.

Malicious Accounts on Social Media for Propaganda.
While many users on social media are legitimate, social me-
dia users may also be malicious, and in some cases are not
even real humans. The low cost of creating social media
accounts also encourages malicious user accounts, such as
social bots, cyborg users, and trolls. A social bot refers to
a social media account that is controlled by a computer al-
gorithm to automatically produce content and interact with
humans (or other bot users) on social media [23]. Social bots
can become malicious entities designed speciﬁcally with the
purpose to do harm, such as manipulating and spreading
fake news on social media. Studies shows that social bots
distorted the 2016 U.S. presidential election online discus-
sions on a large scale [6], and that around 19 million bot
accounts tweeted in support of either Trump or Clinton in
the week leading up to election day8. Trolls, real human
users who aim to disrupt online communities and provoke
consumers into an emotional response, are also playing an
important role in spreading fake news on social media. For
example, evidence suggests that there were 1,000 paid Rus-
sian trolls spreading fake news on Hillary Clinton9. Trolling
behaviors are highly aﬀected by people’s mood and the con-
text of online discussions, which enables the easy dissemi-
nation of fake news among otherwise “normal” online com-
munities [14]. The eﬀect of trolling is to trigger people’s
inner negative emotions, such as anger and fear, resulting
in doubt, distrust, and irrational behavior. Finally, cyborg
users can spread fake news in a way that blends automated
activities with human input. Usually cyborg accounts are
registered by human as a camouﬂage and set automated pro-
grams to perform activities in social media. The easy switch
of functionalities between human and bot oﬀers cyborg users
unique opportunities to spread fake news [15]. In a nutshell,
these highly active and partisan malicious accounts on so-
cial media become the powerful sources and proliferation of
fake news.

Echo Chamber Eﬀect. Social media provides a new paradigm
of information creation and consumption for users. The
information seeking and consumption process are chang-
ing from a mediated form (e.g., by journalists) to a more
disinter-mediated way [19]. Consumers are selectively ex-
posed to certain kinds of news because of the way news
feed appear on their homepage in social media, amplifying
the psychological challenges to dispelling fake news identi-
ﬁed above. For example, users on Facebook always follow
like-minded people and thus receive news that promote their
favored existing narratives [65]. Therefore, users on social
media tend to form groups containing like-minded people
where they then polarize their opinions, resulting in an echo
chamber eﬀect. The echo chamber eﬀect facilitates the pro-

8http://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/2016/11/18/resource-for-
understanding-political-bots/
9http://www.huﬃngtonpost.com/entry/russian-trolls-fake-
news us 58dde6bae4b08194e3b8d5c4

cess by which people consume and believe fake news due to
the following psychological factors [60]: (1) social credibility,
which means people are more likely to perceive a source as
credible if others perceive the source is credible, especially
when there is not enough information available to access the
truthfulness of the source; and (2) frequency heuristic, which
means that consumers may naturally favor information they
hear frequently, even if it is fake news. Studies have shown
that increased exposure to an idea is enough to generate a
positive opinion of it [100; 101], and in echo chambers, users
continue to share and consume the same information. As a
result, this echo chamber eﬀect creates segmented, homoge-
neous communities with a very limited information ecosys-
tem. Research shows that the homogeneous communities
become the primary driver of information diﬀusion that fur-
ther strengthens polarization [18].

3. FAKE NEWS DETECTION
In the previous section, we introduced the conceptual char-
acterization of traditional fake news and fake news in so-
cial media. Based on this characterization, we further ex-
plore the problem deﬁnition and proposed approaches for
fake news detection.

3.1 Problem Deﬁnition
In this subsection, we present the details of mathematical
formulation of fake news detection on social media. Specif-
ically, we will introduce the deﬁnition of key components
of fake news and then present the formal deﬁnition of fake
news detection. The basic notations are deﬁned below,

• Let a refer to a News Article. It consists of two ma-
jor components: Publisher and Content. Publisher (cid:126)pa
includes a set of proﬁle features to describe the origi-
nal author, such as name, domain, age, among other
attributes. Content (cid:126)ca consists of a set of attributes
that represent the news article and includes headline,
text, image, etc.

• We also deﬁne Social News Engagements as a set of
tuples E = {eit} to represent the process of how news
spread over time among n users U = {u1, u2, ..., un}
and their corresponding posts P = {p1, p2, ..., pn} on
social media regarding news article a. Each engage-
ment eit = {ui, pi, t} represents that a user ui spreads
news article a using pi at time t. Note that we set
t = N ull if the article a does not have any engage-
ment yet and thus ui represents the publisher.

Definition 2 (Fake News Detection) Given the social
news engagements E among n users for news article a, the
task of fake news detection is to predict whether the news
article a is a fake news piece or not, i.e., F : E → {0, 1}
such that,

F(a) =

(cid:40)

1,
0, otherwise.

if a is a piece of fake news,

(1)

where F is the prediction function we want to learn.
Note that we deﬁne fake news detection as a binary classiﬁ-
cation problem for the following reason: fake news is essen-
tially a distortion bias on information manipulated by the
publisher. According to previous research about media bias

theory [26], distortion bias is usually modeled as a binary
classiﬁcation problem.
Next, we propose a general data mining framework for fake
news detection which includes two phases: (i) feature ex-
traction and (ii) model construction. The feature extraction
phase aims to represent news content and related auxiliary
information in a formal mathematical structure, and model
construction phase further builds machine learning models
to better diﬀerentiate fake news and real news based on the
feature representations.

3.2 Feature Extraction
Fake news detection on traditional news media mainly relies
on news content, while in social media, extra social context
auxiliary information can be used to as additional informa-
tion to help detect fake news. Thus, we will present the
details of how to extract and represent useful features from
news content and social context.

3.2.1 News Content Features
News content features (cid:126)ca describe the meta information re-
lated to a piece of news. A list of representative news content
attributes are listed below:

• Source: Author or publisher of the news article

• Headline: Short title text that aims to catch the at-
tention of readers and describes the main topic of the
article

• Body Text: Main text that elaborates the details of
the news story; there is usually a major claim that is
speciﬁcally highlighted and that shapes the angle of
the publisher

• Image/Video: Part of the body content of a news
article that provides visual cues to frame the story

Based on these raw content attributes, diﬀerent kinds of
feature representations can be built to extract discriminative
characteristics of fake news. Typically, the news content we
are looking at will mostly be linguistic-based and visual-
based, described in more detail below.

Linguistic-based: Since fake news pieces are intention-
ally created for ﬁnancial or political gain rather than to re-
port objective claims, they often contain opinionated and
inﬂammatory language, crafted as “clickbait” (i.e., to en-
tice users to click on the link to read the full article) or
to incite confusion [13]. Thus, it is reasonable to exploit
linguistic features that capture the diﬀerent writing styles
and sensational headlines to detect fake news. Linguistic-
based features are extracted from the text content in terms
of document organizations from diﬀerent levels, such as char-
acters, words, sentences, and documents. In order to cap-
ture the diﬀerent aspects of fake news and real news, ex-
isting work utilized both common linguistic features and
domain-speciﬁc linguistic features. Common linguistic fea-
tures are often used to represent documents for various tasks
in natural language processing. Typical common linguis-
including character-
tic features are:
level and word-level features, such as total words, charac-
ters per word, frequency of large words, and unique words;
(ii) syntactic features, including sentence-level features, such

(i) lexical features,

as frequency of function words and phrases (i.e., “n-grams”
and bag-of-words approaches [24]) or punctuation and parts-
of-speech (POS) tagging. Domain-speciﬁc linguistic fea-
tures, which are speciﬁcally aligned to news domain, such
as quoted words, external links, number of graphs, and the
average length of graphs, etc [62]. Moreover, other features
can be speciﬁcally designed to capture the deceptive cues
in writing styles to diﬀerentiate fake news, such as lying-
detection features [1].

Visual-based: Visual cues have been shown to be an im-
portant manipulator for fake news propaganda10. As we
have characterized, fake news exploits the individual vulner-
abilities of people and thus often relies on sensational or even
fake images to provoke anger or other emotional response of
consumers. Visual-based features are extracted from visual
images and videos) to capture the diﬀerent
elements (e.g.
characteristics for fake news. Faking images were identiﬁed
based on various user-level and tweet-level hand-crafted fea-
tures using classiﬁcation framework [28]. Recently, various
visual and statistical features has been extracted for news
veriﬁcation [38]. Visual features include clarity score, coher-
ence score, similarity distribution histogram, diversity score,
and clustering score. Statistical features include count, im-
age ratio, multi-image ratio, hot image ratio, long image
ratio, etc.

Social Context Features

3.2.2
In addition to features related directly to the content of
the news articles, additional social context features can also
be derived from the user-driven social engagements of news
consumption on social media platform. Social engagements
represent the news proliferation process over time, which
provides useful auxiliary information to infer the veracity of
news articles. Note that few papers exist in the literature
that detect fake news using social context features. How-
ever, because we believe this is a critical aspect of successful
fake news detection, we introduce a set of common features
utilized in similar research areas, such as rumor veracity
classiﬁcation on social media. Generally, there are three
major aspects of the social media context that we want to
represent: users, generated posts, and networks. Below, we
investigate how we can extract and represent social context
features from these three aspects to support fake news de-
tection.

User-based: As we mentioned in Section 2.3, fake news
pieces are likely to be created and spread by non-human
accounts, such as social bots or cyborgs. Thus, capturing
users’ proﬁles and characteristics by user-based features can
provide useful information for fake news detection. User-
based features represent the characteristics of those users
who have interactions with the news on social media. These
features can be categorized across diﬀerent levels: individual
level and group level. Individual level features are extracted
to infer the credibility and reliability for each user using
various aspects of user demographics, such as registration
age, number of followers/followees, number of tweets the
user has authored, etc [11]. Group level user features cap-
ture overall characteristics of groups of users related to the
news [99]. The assumption is that the spreaders of fake news

10https://www.wired.com/2016/12/photos-fuel-spread-fake-
news/

and real news may form diﬀerent communities with unique
characteristics that can be depicted by group level features.
Commonly used group level features come from aggregat-
ing (e.g., averaging and weighting) individual level features,
such as ‘percentage of veriﬁed users’ and ‘average number
of followers’ [49; 42].

are properly built, existing network metrics can be applied
as feature representations. For example, degree and cluster-
ing coeﬃcient have been used to characterize the diﬀusion
network [42] and friendship network [42]. Other approaches
learn the latent node embedding features by using SVD [69]
or network propagation algorithms [37].

Post-based: People express their emotions or opinions to-
wards fake news through social media posts, such as skep-
tical opinions, sensational reactions, etc. Thus, it is rea-
sonable to extract post-based features to help ﬁnd potential
fake news via reactions from the general public as expressed
in posts. Post-based features focus on identifying useful in-
formation to infer the veracity of news from various aspects
of relevant social media posts. These features can be cat-
egorized as post level, group level, and temporal level. Post
level features generate feature values for each post. The
aforementioned linguistic-based features and some embed-
ding approaches [69] for news content can also be applied
for each post. Speciﬁcally, there are unique features for
posts that represent the social response from general pub-
lic, such as stance, topic, and credibility. Stance features (or
viewpoints) indicate the users’ opinions towards the news,
such as supporting, denying, etc [37]. Topic features can be
extracted using topic models, such as latent Dirichlet allo-
cation (LDA) [49]. Credibility features for posts assess the
degree of reliability [11]. Group level features aim to ag-
gregate the feature values for all relevant posts for speciﬁc
news articles by using “wisdom of crowds”. For example,
the average credibility scores are used to evaluate the credi-
bility of news [37]. A more comprehensive list of group-level
post features can also be found in [11]. Temporal level fea-
tures consider the temporal variations of post level feature
values [49]. Unsupervised embedding methods, such as re-
current neural network (RNN), are utilized to capture the
changes in posts over time [69; 48]. Based on the shape of
this time series for various metrics of relevant posts (e.g,
number of posts), mathematical features can be computed,
such as SpikeM parameters [42].

Network-based: Users form diﬀerent networks on social
media in terms of interests, topics, and relations. As men-
tioned before, fake news dissemination processes tend to
form an echo chamber cycle, highlighting the value of ex-
tracting network-based features to represent these types of
network patterns for fake news detection. Network-based
features are extracted via constructing speciﬁc networks among
the users who published related social media posts. Diﬀerent
types of networks can be constructed. The stance network
can be built with nodes indicating all the tweets relevant
to the news and the edge indicating the weights of similar-
ity of stances [37; 75]. Another type of network is the co-
occurrence network, which is built based on the user engage-
ments by counting whether those users write posts relevant
to the same news articles [69]. In addition, the friendship
network indicates the following/followee structure of users
who post related tweets [42]. An extension of this friendship
network is the diﬀusion network, which tracks the trajectory
of the spread of news [42], where nodes represent the users
and edges represent the information diﬀusion paths among
them. That is, a diﬀusion path between two users ui and uj
exists if and only if (1) uj follows ui, and (2) uj posts about
a given news only after ui does so. After these networks

3.3 Model Construction
In the previous section, we introduced features extracted
from diﬀerent sources, i.e., news content and social con-
text, for fake news detection. In this section, we discuss the
details of the model construction process for several exist-
ing approaches. Speciﬁcally we categorize existing methods
based on their main input sources as: News Content Models
and Social Context Models.

3.3.1 News Content Models
In this subsection, we focus on news content models, which
mainly rely on news content features and existing factual
sources to classify fake news. Speciﬁcally, existing approaches
can be categorized as Knowledge-based and Style-based.

Knowledge-based: Since fake news attempts to spread
false claims in news content, the most straightforward means
of detecting it is to check the truthfulness of major claims
in a news article to decide the news veracity. Knowledge-
based approaches aim to use external sources to fact-check
proposed claims in news content. The goal of fact-checking is
to assign a truth value to a claim in a particular context [83].
Fact-checking has attracted increasing attention, and many
eﬀorts have been made to develop a feasible automated fact-
checking system. Existing fact-checking approaches can be
categorized as expert-oriented, crowdsourcing-oriented, and
computational-oriented.

• Expert-oriented fact-checking heavily relies on human
domain experts to investigate relevant data and doc-
uments to construct the verdicts of claim veracity, for
example PolitiFact11, Snopes12, etc. However, expert-
oriented fact-checking is an intellectually demanding
and time-consuming process, which limits the poten-
tial for high eﬃciency and scalability.

• Crowdsourcing-oriented fact-checking exploits the “wis-
dom of crowd” to enable normal people to annotate
news content; these annotations are then aggregated
to produce an overall assessment of the news verac-
ity. For example, Fiskkit13 allows users to discuss and
annotate the accuracy of speciﬁc parts of a news arti-
cle. As another example, an anti-fake news bot named
“For real” is a public account in the instant communi-
cation mobile application LINE14, which allows people
to report suspicious news content which is then further
checked by editors.

• Computational-oriented fact-checking aims to provide
an automatic scalable system to classify true and false
claims. Previous computational-oriented fact checking
methods try to solve two majors issues: (i) identifying

11http://www.politifact.com/
12http://www.snopes.com/
13http://ﬁskkit.com
14https://grants.g0v.tw/projects/588fa7b382223f001e022944

check-worthy claims and (ii) discriminating the verac-
ity of fact claims. To identify check-worthy claims, fac-
tual claims in news content are extracted that convey
key statements and viewpoints, facilitating the subse-
quent fact-checking process [31]. Fact-checking for spe-
ciﬁc claims largely relies on external resources to deter-
mine the truthfulness of a particular claim. Two typ-
ical external sources include the open web and struc-
tured knowledge graph. Open web sources are utilized
as references that can be compared with given claims
in terms of both the consistency and frequency [5; 50].
Knowledge graphs are integrated from the linked open
data as a structured network topology, such as DB-
pedia and Google Relation Extraction Corpus. Fact-
checking using a knowledge graph aims to check whether
the claims in news content can be inferred from exist-
ing facts in the knowledge graph [98; 16; 72].

Style-based: Fake news publishers often have malicious
intent to spread distorted and misleading information and
inﬂuence large communities of consumers, requiring partic-
ular writing styles necessary to appeal to and persuade a
wide scope of consumers that is not seen in true news ar-
ticles. Style-based approaches try to detect fake news by
capturing the manipulators in the writing style of news con-
tent. There are mainly two typical categories of style-based
methods: Deception-oriented and Objectivity-oriented.

• Deception-oriented stylometric methods capture the
deceptive statements or claims from news content. The
motivation of deception detection originates from foren-
sic psychology (i.e., Undeutsch Hypothesis) [82] and
various forensic tools including Criteria-based Content
Analysis [84] and Scientiﬁc-based Content Analysis [45]
have been developed. More recently, advanced natu-
ral language processing models are applied to spot de-
ception phases from the following perspectives: Deep
syntax and Rhetorical structure. Deep syntax models
have been implemented using probabilistic context fr-
ree grammers (PCFG), with which sentences can be
transformed into rules that describe the syntax struc-
ture. Based on the PCFG, diﬀerent rules can be de-
veloped for deception detection, such as unlexicalized/
lexicalized production rules and grandparent rules [22].
Rhetorical structure theory can be utilized to capture
the diﬀerences between deceptive and truthful sen-
tences [68]. Deep network models, such as convolu-
tional neural networks (CNN), have also been applied
to classify fake news veracity [90].

• Objectivity-oriented approaches capture style signals
that can indicate a decreased objectivity of news con-
tent and thus the potential to mislead consumers, such
as hyperpartisan styles and yellow-journalism. Hyper-
partisan styles represent extreme behavior in favor of a
particular political party, which often correlates with
a strong motivation to create fake news. Linguistic-
based features can be applied to detect hyperpartisan
articles [62]. Yellow-journalism represents those ar-
ticles that do not contain well-researched news, but
instead rely on eye-catching headlines (i.e., clickbait)
with a propensity for exaggeration, sensationalization,
scare-mongering, etc. Often, news titles will summa-
rize the major viewpoints of the article that the author

wants to convey, and thus misleading and deceptive
clickbait titles can serve as a good indicator for recog-
nizing fake news articles [13].

Social Context Models

3.3.2
The nature of social media provides researchers with ad-
ditional resources to supplement and enhance News Con-
tent Models. Social context models include relevant user
social engagements in the analysis, capturing this auxiliary
information from a variety of perspectives. We can clas-
sify existing approaches for social context modeling into two
categories: Stance-based and Propagation-based. Note that
very few existing fake news detection approaches have uti-
lized social context models. Thus, we also introduce similar
methods for rumor detection using social media, which have
potential application for fake news detection.

Stance-based: Stance-based approaches utilize users’ view-
points from relevant post contents to infer the veracity of
original news articles. The stance of users’ posts can be
represented either explicitly or implicitly. Explicit stances
are direct expressions of emotion or opinion, such as the
“thumbs up” and “thumbs down” reactions expressed in
Facebook. Implicit stances can be automatically extracted
from social media posts. Stance detection is the task of
automatically determining from a post whether the user is
in favor of, neutral toward, or against some target entity,
event, or idea [53]. Previous stance classiﬁcation methods
mainly rely on hand-crafted linguistic or embedding features
on individual posts to predict stances [53; 64]. Topic model
methods, such as latent dirichlet allocation (LDA) can be
applied to learn latent stance from topics [37]. Using these
methods, we can infer the news veracity based on the stance
values of relevant posts. Tacchini et al. proposed to con-
struct a bipartite network of user and Facebook posts using
the “like” stance information [75]; based on this network,
a semi-supervised probabilistic model was used to predict
the likelihood of Facebook posts being hoaxes. Jin et al.
explored topic models to learn latent viewpoint values and
further exploited these viewpoints to learn the credibility of
relevant posts and news content [37].

Propagation-based: Propagation-based approaches for fake
news detection reason about the interrelations of relevant
social media posts to predict news credibility. The basic
assumption is that the credibility of a news event is highly
related to the credibilities of relevant social media posts.
Both homogeneous and heterogeneous credibility networks
can be built for propagation process. Homogeneous credi-
bility networks consist of a single type of entities, such as
post or event [37]. Heterogeneous credibility networks in-
volve diﬀerent types of entities, such as posts, sub-events,
and events [36; 29]. Gupta et al. proposed a PageRank-like
credibility propagation algorithm by encoding users’ credi-
bilities and tweets’ implications on a three layer user-tweet-
event heterogeneous information network. Jin et al. pro-
posed to include news aspects (i.e., latent sub-events), build
a three-layer hierarchical network, and utilize a graph op-
timization framework to infer event credibilities. Recently,
the conﬂicting viewpoint relationships are included to build
a homogeneous credibility network among tweets and guide
the process to evaluate their credibilities [37].

4. ASSESSING DETECTION EFFICACY
In this section, we discuss how to assess the performance of
algorithms for fake news detection. We focus on the avail-
able datasets and evaluation metrics for this task.

4.1 Datasets
Online news can be collected from diﬀerent sources, such
as news agency homepages, search engines, and social me-
dia websites. However, manually determining the verac-
ity of news is a challenging task, usually requiring annota-
tors with domain expertise who performs careful analysis of
claims and additional evidence, context, and reports from
authoritative sources. Generally, news data with annota-
tions can be gathered in the following ways: Expert journal-
ists, Fact-checking websites, Industry detectors, and Crowd-
sourced workers. However, there are no agreed upon bench-
mark datasets for the fake news detection problem. Some
publicly available datasets are listed below:

• BuzzFeedNews 15: This dataset comprises a complete
sample of news published in Facebook from 9 news
agencies over a week close to the 2016 U.S. election
from September 19 to 23 and September 26 and 27.
Every post and the linked article were fact-checked
claim-by-claim by 5 BuzzFeed journalists. This dataset
is further enriched in [62] by adding the linked articles,
It contains
attached media, and relevant metadata.
1,627 articles–826 mainstream, 356 left-wing, and 545
right-wing articles.

• LIAR16: This dataset is collected from fact-checking
It includes
website PolitiFact through its API [90].
12,836 human-labeled short statements, which are sam-
pled from various contexts, such as news releases, TV
or radio interviews, campaign speeches, etc. The labels
for news truthfulness are ﬁne-grained multiple classes:
pants-ﬁre, false, barely-true, half-true, mostly true,
and true.

• BS Detector 17: This dataset is collected from a browser
extension called BS detector developed for checking
news veracity18. It searches all links on a given web-
page for references to unreliable sources by checking
against a manually complied list of domains. The la-
bels are the outputs of BS detector, rather than human
annotators.

• CREDBANK 19: This is a large scale crowdsourced
dataset of approximately 60 million tweets that cover
96 days starting from October 2015. All the tweets are
broken down to be related to over 1,000 news events,
with each event assessed for credibilities by 30 anno-
tators from Amazon Mechanical Turk [52].

these datasets also have speciﬁc limitation that make them
challenging to use for fake news detection. BuzzFeedNews
only contains headlines and text for each news piece and
covers news articles from very few news agencies. LIAR in-
cludes mostly short statements, rather than the entire news
content. Further, these statements are collected from vari-
ous speakers, rather than news publishers, and may include
some claims that are not fake news. BS Detector data is
collected and annotated by using a developed news veracity
checking tool. As the labels have not been properly vali-
dated by human experts, any model trained on this data is
really learning the parameters of BS Detector, rather than
expert-annotated ground truth fake news. Finally, CRED-
BANK was originally collected for tweet credibility assess-
ment, so the tweets in this dataset are not really the social
engagements for speciﬁc news articles.
To address the disadvantages of existing fake news detec-
tion datasets, we have an ongoing project to develop a us-
able dataset for fake news detection on social media. This
dataset, called F akeN ewsN et20, includes all mentioned news
content and social context features with reliable ground truth
fake news labels.

4.2 Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the performance of algorithms for fake news de-
tection problem, various evaluation metrics have been used.
In this subsection, we review the most widely used metrics
for fake news detection. Most existing approaches consider
the fake news problem as a classiﬁcation problem that pre-
dicts whether a news article is fake or not:

• True Positive (TP): when predicted fake news pieces

are actually annotated as fake news;

• True Negative (TN): when predicted true news pieces

are actually annotated as true news;

• False Negative (FN): when predicted true news pieces

are actually annotated as fake news;

• False Positive (FP): when predicted fake news pieces

are actually annotated as true news.

By formulating this as a classiﬁcation problem, we can deﬁne
following metrics,

P recision =

Recall =

|T P |
|T P | + |F P |
|T P |
|T P | + |F N |

F 1 = 2 ·

P recision · Recall
P recision + Recall

Accuracy =

|T P | + |T N |
|T P | + |T N | + |F P | + |F N |

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

In Table 1, we compare these public fake news detection
datasets, highlighting the features that can be extracted
from each dataset. We can see that no existing public dataset
In addition,
can provide all possible features of interest.

15https://github.com/BuzzFeedNews/2016-10-facebook-
fact-check/tree/master/data
16https://www.cs.ucsb.edu/ william/data/liar dataset.zip
17https://www.kaggle.com/mrisdal/fake-news
18https://github.com/bs-detector/bs-detector
19http://compsocial.github.io/CREDBANK-data/

These metrics are commonly used in the machine learning
community and enable us to evaluate the performance of a
classiﬁer from diﬀerent perspectives. Speciﬁcally, accuracy
measures the similarity between predicted fake news and real
fake news. Precision measures the fraction of all detected
fake news that are annotated as fake news, addressing the
important problem of identifying which news is fake. How-
ever, because fake news datasets are often skewed, a high
precision can be easily achieved by making fewer positive

20https://github.com/KaiDMML/FakeNewsNet

Table 1: Comparison of Fake News Detection Datasets.

Features

News Content

Social Context

Dataset

Linguistic Visual User Post Network

BuzzFeedNews

LIAR

BS Detector

CREDBANK

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

predictions. Thus, recall is used to measure the sensitivity,
or the fraction of annotated fake news articles that are pre-
dicted to be fake news. F1 is used to combine precision and
recall, which can provide an overall prediction performance
for fake news detection. Note that for P recision, Recall,
F1, and Accuracy, the higher the value, the better the per-
formance.
The Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve pro-
vides a way of comparing the performance of classiﬁers by
looking at the trade-oﬀ in the False Positive Rate (FPR) and
the True Positive Rate (TPR). To draw the ROC curve, we
plot the FPR on the x axis and and TPR along the y axis.
The ROC curve compares the performance of diﬀerent clas-
siﬁers by changing class distributions via a threshold. TPR
and FPR are deﬁned as follows (note that TPR is the same
as recall deﬁned above):

T P R =

F P R =

|T P |
|T P | + |F N |
|F P |
|F P | + |T N |

(6)

(7)

Based on the ROC curve, we can compute the Area Under
the Curve (AUC) value, which measures the overall perfor-
mance of how likely the classiﬁer is to rank the fake news
higher than any true news. Based on [30], AUC is deﬁned
as below.

AU C =

(cid:80)(n0 + n1 + 1 − ri) − n0(n0 + 1)/2
n0n1

(8)

where ri is the rank of ith fake news piece and n0 (n1) is
It is worth men-
the number of fake (true) news pieces.
tioning that AUC is more statistically consistent and more
discriminating than accuracy [47], and it is usually applied
in an imbalanced classiﬁcation problem, such as fake news
classiﬁcation, where the number of ground truth fake news
articles and and true news articles have a very imbalanced
distribution.

5. RELATED AREAS
In this section, we further discuss areas that are related to
the problem of fake news detection. We aim to point out
the diﬀerences between these areas and fake news detection
by brieﬂy explaining the task goals and highlighting some
popular methods.

5.1 Rumor Classiﬁcation
A rumor can usually be deﬁned as “a piece of circulating
information whose veracity status is yet to be veriﬁed at
the time of spreading” [102]. The function of a rumor is
to make sense of an ambiguous situation, and the truthful-
ness value could be true, false or unveriﬁed. Previous ap-
proaches for rumor analysis focus on four subtasks: rumor

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

detection, rumor tracking, stance classiﬁcation, and verac-
ity classiﬁcation [102]. Speciﬁcally, rumor detection aims to
classify a piece of information as rumor or non-rumor [96;
70]; rumor tracking aims to collect and ﬁlter posts discussing
speciﬁc rumors; rumor stance classiﬁcation determines how
each relevant post is oriented with respect to the rumor’s
veracity; veracity classiﬁcation attempts to predict the ac-
tual truth value of the rumor. The most related task to fake
news detection is the rumor veracity classiﬁcation. Rumor
veracity classiﬁcation relies heavily on the other subtasks,
requiring the stances or opinions can be extracted from rel-
evant posts. These posts are considered as important sen-
sors for determining the veracity of the rumor. Diﬀerent
from rumors, which may include long-term rumors, such as
conspiracy theories, as well as short-term emerging rumors,
fake news refers to information related speciﬁcally to public
news events that can be veriﬁed as false.

5.2 Truth Discovery
Truth discovery is the problem of detecting true facts from
multiple conﬂicting sources [46]. Truth discovery methods
do not explore the fact claims directly, but rely on a collec-
tion of contradicting sources that record the properties of
objects to determine the truth value. Truth discovery aims
to determine the source credibility and object truthfulness
at the same time. The fake news detection problem can
beneﬁt from various aspects of truth discovery approaches
under diﬀerent scenarios. First, the credibility of diﬀerent
news outlets can be modeled to infer the truthfulness of re-
ported news. Second, relevant social media posts can also
be modeled as social response sources to better determine
the truthfulness of claims [56; 93]. However, there are some
other issues that must be considered to apply truth discovery
to fake news detection in social media scenarios. First, most
existing truth discovery methods focus on handling struc-
tured input in the form of Subject-Predicate-Object (SPO)
tuples, while social media data is highly unstructured and
noisy. Second, truth discovery methods can not be well ap-
plied when a fake news article is newly launched and pub-
lished by only a few news outlets because at that point there
is not enough social media posts relevant to it to serve as
additional sources.

5.3 Clickbait Detection
Clickbait is a term commonly used to describe eye-catching
and teaser headlines in online media. Clickbait headlines
create a so-called “curiosity gap”, increasing the likelihood
that reader will click the target link to satisfy their curios-
ity. Existing clickbait detection approaches utilize various
linguistic features extracted from teaser messages, linked
webpages, and tweet meta information [12; 8; 63]. Diﬀer-
ent types of clickbait are categorized, and some of them are
highly correlated with non-factual claims [7]. The underly-

ing motivation of clickbait is usually for click-through rates
and the resultant advertising revenue. Thus, the body text
of clickbait articles are often informally organized and poorly
reasoned. This discrepancy has been used by researchers to
identify the inconsistency between headlines and news con-
tents in an attempt to detect fake news articles21. Even
though not all fake news may include clickbait headlines,
speciﬁc clickbait headlines could serve as an important in-
dicator, and various features can be utilized to help detect
fake news.

5.4 Spammer and Bot Detection
Spammer detection on social media, which aims to cap-
ture malicious users that coordinate among themselves to
launch various attacks, such as spreading ads, disseminat-
ing pornography, delivering viruses, and phishing [44], has
recently attracted wide attention. Existing approaches for
social spammer detection mainly rely on extracting features
from user activities and social network information [35; 95;
33; 34]. In addition, the rise of social bots has also increased
the circulation of false information as they automatically
retweet posts without verifying the facts [23]. The major
challenge brought by social bots is that they can give a false
impression that information is highly popular and endorsed
by many people, which enables the echo chamber eﬀect for
the propagation of fake news. Previous approaches for bot
detection are based on social network information, crowd-
sourcing, and discriminative features [23; 55; 54]. Thus,
both spammer and social bots could provide insights about
target speciﬁc malicious social media accounts that can be
used for fake news detection.

6. OPEN ISSUES AND FUTURE RESEARCH
In this section, we present some open issues in fake news
detection and future research directions. Fake news detec-
tion on social media is a newly emerging research area, so
we aim to point out promising research directions from a
data mining perspective. Speciﬁcally, as shown in Figure 2,
we outline the research directions in four categories: Data-
oriented, Feature-oriented, Model-oriented and Application-
oriented.

Data-oriented: Data-oriented fake news research is fo-
cusing on diﬀerent kinds of data characteristics, such as :
dataset, temporal and psychological. From a dataset per-
spective, we demonstrated that there is no existing bench-
mark dataset that includes resources to extract all relevant
features. A promising direction is to create a comprehensive
and large-scale fake news benchmark dataset, which can be
used by researchers to facilitate further research in this area.
From a temporal perspective, fake news dissemination on so-
cial media demonstrates unique temporal patterns diﬀerent
from true news. Along this line, one interesting problem
is to perform early fake news detection, which aims to give
early alerts of fake news during the dissemination process.
For example, this approach could look at only social media
posts within some time delay of the original post as sources
for news veriﬁcation [37]. Detecting fake news early can help
prevent further propagation on social media. From a psycho-
logical perspective, diﬀerent aspects of fake news have been
qualitatively explored in the social psychology literature [92;

21http://www.fakenewschallenge.org/

58; 59], but quantitative studies to verify these psychological
factors are rather limited. For example, the echo chamber
eﬀect plays an important role for fake news spreading in so-
cial media. Then how to capture echo chamber eﬀects and
how to utilize the pattern for fake news detection in social
media could be an interesting investigation. Moreover, in-
tention detection from news data is promising but limited
as most existing fake news research focus on detecting the
authenticity but ignore the intent aspect of fake news. In-
tention detection is very challenging as the intention is often
explicitly unavailable. Thus.
it’s worth to explore how to
use data mining methods to validate and capture psychol-
ogy intentions.

Feature-oriented: Feature-oriented fake news research aims
to determine eﬀective features for detecting fake news from
multiple data sources. We have demonstrated that there are
two major data sources: news content and social context.
From a news content perspective, we introduced linguistic-
based and visual-based techniques to extract features from
text information. Note that linguistic-based features have
been widely studied for general NLP tasks, such as text clas-
siﬁcation and clustering, and speciﬁc applications such as
author identiﬁcation [32] and deception detection [22], but
the underlying characteristics of fake news have not been
fully understood. Moreover, embedding techniques, such as
word embedding and deep neural networks, are attracting
much attention for textual feature extraction, and has the
potential to learn better representations [90; 87; 88]. In ad-
dition, visual features extracted from images are also shown
to be important indicators for fake news [38]. However, very
limited research has been done to exploit eﬀective visual fea-
tures, including traditional local and global features [61] and
newly emerging deep network-based features [43; 89; 85],
for the fake news detection problem. Recently, it has been
shown that advanced tools can manipulate video footage of
public ﬁgures [80], synthesize high quality videos [74], etc.
Thus, it becomes much more challenging and important to
diﬀerentiate real and fake visual content, and more advanced
visual-based features are needed for this research. From a
social context perspective, we introduced user-based, post-
based, and network-based features. Existing user-based fea-
tures mainly focus on general user proﬁles, rather than dif-
ferentiating account types separately and extracting user-
speciﬁc features. Post-based features can be represented us-
ing other techniques, such as convolutional neural networks
(CNN) [69], to better capture people’s opinions and reac-
tions toward fake news. Images in social media posts can
also be utilized to better understand users’ sentiments [91]
toward news events. Network-based features are extracted
to represent how diﬀerent types of networks are constructed.
It is important to extend this preliminary work to explore
(i) how other networks can be constructed in terms of diﬀer-
ent aspects of relationships among relevant users and posts;
and (ii) other advanced methods of network representations,
such as network embedding [78; 86].

Model-oriented: Model-oriented fake news research opens
the door to building more eﬀective and practical models for
fake news detection. Most previously mentioned approaches
focus on extracting various features, incorporating theses
features into supervised classiﬁcation models, such as na¨ıve
Bayes, decision tree, logistic regression, k nearest neighbor

Figure 2: Future directions and open issues for fake news detection on social media.

(KNN), and support vector machines (SVM), and then se-
lecting the classiﬁer that performs the best [62; 75; 1]. More
research can be done to build more complex and eﬀective
models and to better utilize extracted features, such as ag-
gregation methods, probabilistic methods, ensemble methods,
or projection methods [73]. Speciﬁcally, we think there is
some promising research in the following directions. First,
aggregation methods combine diﬀerent feature representa-
tions into a weighted form and optimize the feature weights.
Second, since fake news may commonly mix true statements
with false claims, it may make more sense to predict the
likelihood of fake news instead of producing a binary value;
probabilistic models predict a probabilistic distribution of
class labels (i.e., fake news versus true news) by assuming
a generative model that pulls from the same distribution as
the original feature space [25]. Third, one of the major chal-
lenges for fake news detection is the fact that each feature,
such as source credibility, news content style, or social re-
sponse, has some limitations to directly predict fake news on
its own. Ensemble methods build a conjunction of several
weak classiﬁers to learn a strong classiﬁer that is more suc-
cessful than any individual classiﬁer alone; ensembles have
been widely applied to various applications in the machine
learning literature [20]. It may be beneﬁcial to build ensem-
ble models as news content and social context features each
have supplementary information that has the potential to
boost fake news detection performance. Finally, fake news
content or social context information may be noisy in the
raw feature space; projection methods refer to approaches
that lean projection functions to map between original fea-
ture spaces (e.g., news content features and social context
features) and the latent feature spaces that may be more
useful for classiﬁcation.
Moreover, most existing approaches are supervised, which
requires a pre-annotated fake news ground truth dataset
to train a model. However, obtaining a reliable fake news
dataset is very time and labor intensive, as the process of-
ten requires expert annotators to perform careful analysis of
claims and additional evidence, context, and reports from
authoritative sources. Thus, it is also important to con-
sider scenarios where limited or no labeled fake news pieces
are available in which semi-supervised or unsupervised mod-
els can be applied. While the models created by super-

vised classiﬁcation methods may be more accurate given a
well-curated ground truth dataset for training, unsupervised
models can be more practical because unlabeled datasets are
easier to obtain.

Application-oriented: Application-oriented fake news re-
search encompass research that goes into other areas beyond
fake news detection. We propose two major directions along
these lines: fake news diﬀusion and fake news intervention.
Fake news diﬀusion characterizes the diﬀusion paths and
patterns of fake news on social media sites. Some early re-
search has shown that true information and misinformation
follow diﬀerent patterns when propagating in online social
networks [18; 51]. Similarly, the diﬀusion of fake news in
social media demonstrates its own characteristics that need
further investigation, such as social dimensions, life cycle,
spreader identiﬁcation, etc. Social dimensions refer to the
heterogeneity and weak dependency of social connections
within diﬀerent social communities. Users’ perceptions of
fake news pieces are highly aﬀected by their like-minded
friends in social media (i.e., echo chambers), while the de-
gree diﬀers along diﬀerent social dimensions. Thus, it is
worth exploring why and how diﬀerent social dimensions
play a role in spreading fake news in terms of diﬀerent top-
ics, such as political, education, sports, etc. The fake news
diﬀusion process also has diﬀerent stages in terms of peo-
ple’s attentions and reactions as time goes by, resulting in
a unique life cycle. Research has shown that breaking news
and in-depth news demonstrate diﬀerent life cycles in social
media [10]. Studying the life cycle of fake news will provide
deeper understanding of how particular stories “go viral”
from normal public discourse. Tracking the life cycle of fake
news on social media requires recording essential trajectories
of fake news diﬀusion in general [71], as well as further in-
vestigations of the process for speciﬁc fake news pieces, such
as graph-based models and evolution-based models [27]. In
addition, identifying key spreaders of fake news is crucial to
mitigate the diﬀusion scope in social media. Note that key
spreaders can be categorized in two ways, i.e., stance and
authenticity. Along the stance dimensions, spreaders can
either be (i) clariﬁers, who propose skeptical and opposing
viewpoints towards fake news and try to clarify them; or (ii)
persuaders, who spread fake news with supporting opinions

to persuade others to believe it. In this sense, it is impor-
tant to explore how to detect clariﬁers and persuaders and
better use them to control the dissemination of fake news.
From an authenticity perspective, spreaders could be either
human, bot, or cyborg. Social bots have been used to inten-
tionally spread fake news in social media, which motivates
further research to better characterize and detect malicious
accounts designed for propaganda.
Finally, we also propose further research into fake news in-
tervention, which aims to reduce the eﬀects of fake news
by proactive intervention methods that minimize the spread
scope or reactive intervention methods after fake news goes
viral. Proactive fake news intervention methods try to (i)
remove malicious accounts that spread fake news or fake
news itself to isolate it from future consumers; (ii) immu-
nize users with true news to change the belief of users that
may already have been aﬀected by fake news. There is recent
research that attempts to use content-based immunization
and network-based immunization methods in misinforma-
tion intervention [94; 97]. One approach uses a multivariate
Hawkes process to model both true news and fake news and
mitigate the spreading of fake news in real-time [21]. The
aforementioned spreader detection techniques can also be
applied to target certain users (e.g., persuaders) in social
media to stop spreading fake news, or other users (e.g. clar-
iﬁers) to maximize the spread of corresponding true news.

7. CONCLUSION
With the increasing popularity of social media, more and
more people consume news from social media instead of tra-
ditional news media. However, social media has also been
used to spread fake news, which has strong negative impacts
on individual users and broader society. In this article, we
explored the fake news problem by reviewing existing lit-
erature in two phases: characterization and detection.
In
the characterization phase, we introduced the basic concepts
and principles of fake news in both traditional media and so-
cial media. In the detection phase, we reviewed existing fake
news detection approaches from a data mining perspective,
including feature extraction and model construction. We
also further discussed the datasets, evaluation metrics, and
promising future directions in fake news detection research
and expand the ﬁeld to other applications.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by, or in part
by, the ONR grant N00014-16-1-2257.

9. REFERENCES

[1] Sadia Afroz, Michael Brennan, and Rachel Green-
stadt. Detecting hoaxes, frauds, and deception in writ-
ing style online. In ISSP’12.

[2] Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow. Social media
and fake news in the 2016 election. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.

[3] Solomon E Asch and H Guetzkow. Eﬀects of group
pressure upon the modiﬁcation and distortion of judg-
ments. Groups, leadership, and men, pages 222–236,
1951.

[4] Meital Balmas. When fake news becomes real: Com-
bined exposure to multiple news sources and political
attitudes of ineﬃcacy, alienation, and cynicism. Com-
munication Research, 41(3):430–454, 2014.

[5] Michele Banko, Michael J Cafarella, Stephen Soder-
land, Matthew Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. Open
information extraction from the web. In IJCAI’07.

[6] Alessandro Bessi and Emilio Ferrara. Social bots dis-
tort the 2016 us presidential election online discussion.
First Monday, 21(11), 2016.

[7] Prakhar Biyani, Kostas Tsioutsiouliklis, and John
Blackmer. ” 8 amazing secrets for getting more clicks”:
Detecting clickbaits in news streams using article in-
formality. In AAAI’16.

[8] Jonas Nygaard Blom and Kenneth Reinecke Hansen.
Click bait: Forward-reference as lure in online news
headlines. Journal of Pragmatics, 76:87–100, 2015.

[9] Paul R Brewer, Dannagal Goldthwaite Young, and
Michelle Morreale. The impact of real news about
fake news: Intertextual processes and political satire.
International Journal of Public Opinion Research,
25(3):323–343, 2013.

[10] Carlos Castillo, Mohammed El-Haddad, J¨urgen Pfef-
fer, and Matt Stempeck. Characterizing the life cycle
of online news stories using social media reactions. In
CSCW’14.

[11] Carlos Castillo, Marcelo Mendoza, and Barbara
In

Information credibility on twitter.

Poblete.
WWW’11.

[12] Abhijnan Chakraborty, Bhargavi Paranjape, Sourya
Kakarla, and Niloy Ganguly. Stop clickbait: Detect-
ing and preventing clickbaits in online news media. In
ASONAM’16.

[13] Yimin Chen, Niall J Conroy, and Victoria L Rubin.
Misleading online content: Recognizing clickbait as
false news. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM on Work-
shop on Multimodal Deception Detection, pages 15–19.
ACM, 2015.

[14] Justin Cheng, Michael Bernstein, Cristian Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil, and Jure Leskovec. Anyone can be-
come a troll: Causes of trolling behavior in online dis-
cussions. In CSCW ’17.

[15] Zi Chu, Steven Gianvecchio, Haining Wang, and
Sushil Jajodia. Detecting automation of twitter ac-
counts: Are you a human, bot, or cyborg?
IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
9(6):811–824, 2012.

[16] Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia, Prashant Shiralkar,
Luis M Rocha, Johan Bollen, Filippo Menczer, and
Alessandro Flammini. Computational fact checking
from knowledge networks. PloS one, 10(6):e0128193,
2015.

[17] Niall J Conroy, Victoria L Rubin, and Yimin Chen.
Automatic deception detection: Methods for ﬁnding
fake news. Proceedings of the Association for Infor-
mation Science and Technology, 52(1):1–4, 2015.

[18] Michela Del Vicario, Alessandro Bessi, Fabiana Zollo,
Fabio Petroni, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli, H Eu-

gene Stanley, and Walter Quattrociocchi. The spread-
ing of misinformation online. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 113(3):554–559, 2016.

[19] Michela Del Vicario, Gianna Vivaldo, Alessandro
Bessi, Fabiana Zollo, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli,
and Walter Quattrociocchi. Echo chambers: Emo-
tional contagion and group polarization on facebook.
Scientiﬁc Reports, 6, 2016.

[20] Thomas G Dietterich et al. Ensemble methods in ma-
chine learning. Multiple classiﬁer systems, 1857:1–15,
2000.

[21] Mehrdad Farajtabar, Jiachen Yang, Xiaojing Ye,
Huan Xu, Rakshit Trivedi, Elias Khalil, Shuang Li,
Le Song, and Hongyuan Zha. Fake news mitigation
via point process based intervention. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.07823, 2017.

[22] Song Feng, Ritwik Banerjee, and Yejin Choi. Syntactic
stylometry for deception detection. In ACL’12.

[23] Emilio Ferrara, Onur Varol, Clayton Davis, Filippo
Menczer, and Alessandro Flammini. The rise of so-
cial bots. Communications of the ACM, 59(7):96–104,
2016.

[24] Johannes F¨urnkranz. A study using n-gram features
for text categorization. Austrian Research Institute for
Artiﬁcal Intelligence, 3(1998):1–10, 1998.

[25] Ashutosh Garg and Dan Roth. Understanding proba-

bilistic classiﬁers. ECML’01.

[26] Matthew Gentzkow, Jesse M Shapiro, and Daniel F
Stone. Media bias in the marketplace: Theory. Tech-
nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
2014.

[27] Adrien Guille, Hakim Hacid, Cecile Favre, and
Djamel A Zighed. Information diﬀusion in online social
networks: A survey. ACM Sigmod Record, 42(2):17–
28, 2013.

[28] Aditi Gupta, Hemank Lamba, Ponnurangam Ku-
maraguru, and Anupam Joshi. Faking sandy: charac-
terizing and identifying fake images on twitter during
hurricane sandy. In WWW’13.

[29] Manish Gupta, Peixiang Zhao, and Jiawei Han. Eval-
uating event credibility on twitter. In PSDM’12.

[30] David J Hand and Robert J Till. A simple generalisa-
tion of the area under the roc curve for multiple class
classiﬁcation problems. Machine learning, 2001.

[31] Naeemul Hassan, Chengkai Li, and Mark Tremayne.
Detecting check-worthy factual claims in presidential
debates. In CIKM’15.

[32] John Houvardas and Efstathios Stamatatos. N-gram
feature selection for authorship identiﬁcation. Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence: Methodology, Systems, and Applica-
tions, pages 77–86, 2006.

[33] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, Huiji Gao, and Huan Liu. So-
cial spammer detection with sentiment information. In
ICDM’14.

[34] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, and Huan Liu. Online social

spammer detection. In AAAI’14, pages 59–65, 2014.

[35] Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, Yanchao Zhang, and Huan Liu.

Social spammer detection in microblogging. In IJ-
CAI’13.

[36] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Yongdong
Zhang. News credibility evaluation on microblog with
a hierarchical propagation model. In ICDM’14.

[37] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yongdong Zhang, and Jiebo
Luo. News veriﬁcation by exploiting conﬂicting social
viewpoints in microblogs. In AAAI’16.

[38] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yongdong Zhang, Jianshe Zhou,
and Qi Tian. Novel visual and statistical image fea-
tures for microblogs news veriﬁcation. IEEE Transac-
tions on Multimedia, 19(3):598–608, 2017.

[39] Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. Prospect the-
ory: An analysis of decision under risk. Economet-
rica: Journal of the econometric society, pages 263–
291, 1979.

[40] Jean-Noel Kapferer. Rumors: Uses, Interpretation

and Necessity. Routledge, 2017.

[41] David O Klein and Joshua R Wueller. Fake news: A

legal perspective. 2017.

[42] Sejeong Kwon, Meeyoung Cha, Kyomin Jung, Wei
Chen, and Yajun Wang. Prominent features of rumor
propagation in online social media. In ICDM’13, pages
1103–1108. IEEE, 2013.

[43] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoﬀrey Hinton.
Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444, 2015.

[44] Kyumin Lee, James Caverlee, and Steve Webb. Un-
covering social spammers: social honeypots+ machine
learning. In SIGIR’10.

[45] Tony Lesce. Scan: Deception detection by scientiﬁc
content analysis. Law and Order, 38(8):3–6, 1990.

[46] Yaliang Li, Jing Gao, Chuishi Meng, Qi Li, Lu Su,
Bo Zhao, Wei Fan, and Jiawei Han. A survey on
truth discovery. ACM Sigkdd Explorations Newsletter,
17(2):1–16, 2016.

[47] Charles X Ling, Jin Huang, and Harry Zhang. Auc: a
statistically consistent and more discriminating mea-
sure than accuracy.

[48] Jing Ma, Wei Gao, Prasenjit Mitra, Sejeong Kwon,
Bernard J Jansen, Kam-Fai Wong, and Meeyoung
Cha. Detecting rumors from microblogs with recur-
rent neural networks.

[49] Jing Ma, Wei Gao, Zhongyu Wei, Yueming Lu, and
Kam-Fai Wong. Detect rumors using time series of so-
cial context information on microblogging websites. In
CIKM’15.

[50] Amr Magdy and Nayer Wanas. Web-based statistical
fact checking of textual documents. In Proceedings of
the 2nd international workshop on Search and mining
user-generated contents, pages 103–110. ACM, 2010.

[51] Filippo Menczer. The spread of misinformation in so-

cial media. In WWW’16.

[52] Tanushree Mitra and Eric Gilbert. Credbank: A large-
scale social media corpus with associated credibility
annotations. In ICWSM’15.

[53] Saif M Mohammad, Parinaz Sobhani, and Svet-
lana Kiritchenko. Stance and sentiment in tweets.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT),
17(3):26, 2017.

Huan Liu. Leveraging the implicit structure within so-
cial media for emergent rumor detection. In CIKM’15.

[54] Fred Morstatter, Harsh Dani, Justin Sampson, and
Huan Liu. Can one tamper with the sample api?: To-
ward neutralizing bias from spam and bot content. In
WWW’16.

[55] Fred Morstatter, Liang Wu, Tahora H Nazer, Kath-
leen M Carley, and Huan Liu. A new approach to bot
detection: Striking the balance between precision and
recall. In ASONAM’16.

[56] Subhabrata Mukherjee and Gerhard Weikum. Lever-
aging joint interactions for credibility analysis in news
communities. In CIKM’15.

[57] Eni Mustafaraj and Panagiotis Takis Metaxas. The
fake news spreading plague: Was it preventable?
arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.06988, 2017.

[58] Raymond S Nickerson. Conﬁrmation bias: A ubiqui-
tous phenomenon in many guises. Review of general
psychology, 2(2):175, 1998.

[59] Brendan Nyhan and Jason Reiﬂer. When corrections
fail: The persistence of political misperceptions. Po-
litical Behavior, 32(2):303–330, 2010.

[60] Christopher Paul and Miriam Matthews. The russian

ﬁrehose of falsehood propaganda model.

[61] Dong ping Tian et al. A review on image feature ex-
traction and representation techniques. International
Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering,
8(4):385–396, 2013.

[62] Martin Potthast, Johannes Kiesel, Kevin Reinartz,
Janek Bevendorﬀ, and Benno Stein. A stylometric in-
quiry into hyperpartisan and fake news. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.05638, 2017.

[63] Martin Potthast, Sebastian K¨opsel, Benno Stein, and
Matthias Hagen. Clickbait detection. In European
Conference on Information Retrieval, pages 810–817.
Springer, 2016.

[64] Vahed Qazvinian, Emily Rosengren, Dragomir R
Radev, and Qiaozhu Mei. Rumor has it: Identifying
misinformation in microblogs. In EMNLP’11.

[65] Walter Quattrociocchi, Antonio Scala, and Cass R

Sunstein. Echo chambers on facebook. 2016.

[66] Victoria L Rubin, Yimin Chen, and Niall J Conroy.
Deception detection for news: three types of fakes.
Proceedings of the Association for Information Science
and Technology, 52(1):1–4, 2015.

[67] Victoria L Rubin, Niall J Conroy, Yimin Chen, and
Sarah Cornwell. Fake news or truth? using satirical
cues to detect potentially misleading news. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 7–17, 2016.

[68] Victoria L Rubin and Tatiana Lukoianova. Truth and
deception at the rhetorical structure level. Journal of
the Association for Information Science and Technol-
ogy, 66(5):905–917, 2015.

[69] Natali Ruchansky, Sungyong Seo, and Yan Liu. Csi:
A hybrid deep model for fake news. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.06959, 2017.

[70] Justin Sampson, Fred Morstatter, Liang Wu, and

[71] Chengcheng Shao, Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia,
Alessandro Flammini, and Filippo Menczer. Hoaxy:
A platform for tracking online misinformation. In
WWW’16.

[72] Baoxu Shi and Tim Weninger. Fact checking in het-
erogeneous information networks. In WWW’16.

[73] Kai Shu, Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Reza Zafarani,
and Huan Liu. User identity linkage across online so-
cial networks: A review. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
Newsletter, 18(2):5–17, 2017.

[74] Supasorn Suwajanakorn, Steven M Seitz, and Ira
Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. Synthesizing obama: learn-
ing lip sync from audio. ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics (TOG), 36(4):95, 2017.

[75] Eugenio Tacchini, Gabriele Ballarin, Marco L
Della Vedova, Stefano Moret, and Luca de Alfaro.
Some like it hoax: Automated fake news detection
in social networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.07506,
2017.

[76] Henri Tajfel and John C Turner. An integrative theory
of intergroup conﬂict. The social psychology of inter-
group relations, 33(47):74, 1979.

[77] Henri Tajfel and John C Turner. The social identity

theory of intergroup behavior. 2004.

[78] Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang,
Jun Yan, and Qiaozhu Mei. Line: Large-scale infor-
mation network embedding. In WWW’15.

[79] Jiliang Tang, Yi Chang, and Huan Liu. Mining social
media with social theories: a survey. ACM SIGKDD
Explorations Newsletter, 15(2):20–29, 2014.

[80] Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, Marc Stamminger,
Christian Theobalt, and Matthias Nießner. Face2face:
Real-time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos.
In CVPR’16.

[81] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Advances in
prospect theory: Cumulative representation of uncer-
tainty. Journal of Risk and uncertainty, 5(4):297–323,
1992.

[82] Udo Undeutsch. Beurteilung der glaubhaftigkeit von
aussagen. Handbuch der psychologie, 11:26–181, 1967.

[83] Andreas Vlachos and Sebastian Riedel. Fact checking:
Task deﬁnition and dataset construction. ACL’14.

[84] Aldert Vrij. Criteria-based content analysis: A quali-
tative review of the ﬁrst 37 studies. Psychology, Public
Policy, and Law, 11(1):3, 2005.

[85] Suhang Wang, Charu Aggarwal, Jiliang Tang, and
Huan Liu. Attributed signed network embedding. In
CIKM’17.

[86] Suhang Wang,

Jiliang Tang, Charu Aggarwal,
Yi Chang, and Huan Liu. Signed network embedding
in social media. In SDM’17.

[87] Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Charu Aggarwal, and
Huan Liu. Linked document embedding for classiﬁca-
tion. In CIKM’16.

[88] Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Fred Morstatter, and
Huan Liu. Paired restricted boltzmann machine for
linked data. In CIKM’16.

[96] Liang Wu, Jundong Li, Xia Hu, and Huan Liu. Glean-
ing wisdom from the past: Early detection of emerging
rumors in social media. In SDM’17.

[89] Suhang Wang, Yilin Wang, Jiliang Tang, Kai Shu,
Suhas Ranganath, and Huan Liu. What your images
reveal: Exploiting visual contents for point-of-interest
recommendation. In WWW’17.

[90] William Yang Wang. ” liar, liar pants on ﬁre”: A
new benchmark dataset for fake news detection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.00648, 2017.

[91] Yilin Wang, Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, Huan Liu,
and Baoxin Li. Unsupervised sentiment analysis for
social media images. In IJCAI, pages 2378–2379, 2015.

[92] Andrew Ward, L Ross, E Reed, E Turiel, and
T Brown. Naive realism in everyday life: Implications
for social conﬂict and misunderstanding. Values and
knowledge, pages 103–135, 1997.

[93] Gerhard Weikum. What computers should know,
shouldn’t know, and shouldn’t believe. In WWW’17.

[94] L Wu, F Morstatter, X Hu, and H Liu. Chapter 5:

Mining misinformation in social media, 2016.

[95] Liang Wu, Xia Hu, Fred Morstatter, and Huan Liu.
Adaptive spammer detection with sparse group mod-
eling. In ICWSM’17.

[97] Liang Wu, Fred Morstatter, Xia Hu, and Huan Liu.
Mining misinformation in social media. Big Data in
Complex and Social Networks, pages 123–152, 2016.

[98] You Wu, Pankaj K Agarwal, Chengkai Li, Jun Yang,
and Cong Yu. Toward computational fact-checking.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 7(7):589–600,
2014.

[99] Fan Yang, Yang Liu, Xiaohui Yu, and Min Yang. Au-
tomatic detection of rumor on sina weibo. In Proceed-
ings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Mining Data
Semantics, page 13. ACM, 2012.

[100] Robert B Zajonc. Attitudinal eﬀects of mere exposure.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 9(2p2):1,
1968.

[101] Robert B Zajonc. Mere exposure: A gateway to the
subliminal. Current directions in psychological science,
10(6):224–228, 2001.

[102] Arkaitz Zubiaga, Ahmet Aker, Kalina Bontcheva,
Maria Liakata, and Rob Procter. Detection and res-
olution of rumours in social media: A survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.00656, 2017.

