Get To The Point: Summarization with Pointer-Generator Networks

Abigail See
Stanford University
abisee@stanford.edu

Peter J. Liu
Google Brain
peterjliu@google.com

Christopher D. Manning
Stanford University
manning@stanford.edu

7
1
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
2
 
 
]
L
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
2
v
8
6
3
4
0
.
4
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Neural sequence-to-sequence models have
provided a viable new approach for ab-
stractive text summarization (meaning
they are not restricted to simply selecting
and rearranging passages from the origi-
nal text). However, these models have two
shortcomings: they are liable to reproduce
factual details inaccurately, and they tend
to repeat themselves. In this work we pro-
pose a novel architecture that augments the
standard sequence-to-sequence attentional
model in two orthogonal ways.
First,
we use a hybrid pointer-generator network
that can copy words from the source text
via pointing, which aids accurate repro-
duction of information, while retaining the
ability to produce novel words through the
generator. Second, we use coverage to
keep track of what has been summarized,
which discourages repetition. We apply
our model to the CNN / Daily Mail sum-
marization task, outperforming the current
abstractive state-of-the-art by at least 2
ROUGE points.

Original Text (truncated): lagos, nigeria (cnn) a day after winning nige-
ria’s presidency, muhammadu buhari told cnn’s christiane amanpour that
he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria
and go after the root of the nation’s unrest. buhari said he’ll “rapidly give
attention” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria, where the ter-
rorist group boko haram operates. by cooperating with neighboring nations
chad, cameroon and niger, he said his administration is conﬁdent it will
be able to thwart criminals and others contributing to nigeria’s instability.
for the ﬁrst time in nigeria’s history, the opposition defeated the ruling party
in democratic elections. buhari defeated incumbent goodluck jonathan by
about 2 million votes, according to nigeria’s independent national electoral
commission. the win comes after a long history of military rule, coups
and botched attempts at democracy in africa’s most populous nation.

Baseline Seq2Seq + Attention: UNK UNK says his administration is conﬁ-
dent it will be able to destabilize nigeria’s economy. UNK says his admin-
istration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals and other nigerians.
he says the country has long nigeria and nigeria’s economy.

Pointer-Gen: muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght cor-
ruption in the northeast part of nigeria. he says he’ll “rapidly give at-
tention” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria. he says his
administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals.

Pointer-Gen + Coverage: muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively
ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria. he says his administration is
conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals. the win comes after a long his-
tory of military rule, coups and botched attempts at democracy in africa’s
most populous nation.

Figure 1: Comparison of output of 3 abstrac-
tive summarization models on a news article. The
baseline model makes factual errors, a nonsen-
sical sentence and struggles with OOV words
muhammadu buhari. The pointer-generator model
is accurate but repeats itself. Coverage eliminates
repetition. The ﬁnal summary is composed from
several fragments.

1

Introduction

Summarization is the task of condensing a piece of
text to a shorter version that contains the main in-
formation from the original. There are two broad
approaches to summarization: extractive and ab-
stractive. Extractive methods assemble summaries
exclusively from passages (usually whole sen-
tences) taken directly from the source text, while
abstractive methods may generate novel words
and phrases not featured in the source text – as
a human-written abstract usually does. The ex-
tractive approach is easier, because copying large

chunks of text from the source document ensures
baseline levels of grammaticality and accuracy.
On the other hand, sophisticated abilities that are
crucial to high-quality summarization, such as
paraphrasing, generalization, or the incorporation
of real-world knowledge, are possible only in an
abstractive framework (see Figure 5).

Due to the difﬁculty of abstractive summariza-
tion, the great majority of past work has been ex-
tractive (Kupiec et al., 1995; Paice, 1990; Sag-
gion and Poibeau, 2013). However, the recent suc-
cess of sequence-to-sequence models (Sutskever

Figure 2: Baseline sequence-to-sequence model with attention. The model may attend to relevant words
in the source text to generate novel words, e.g., to produce the novel word beat in the abstractive summary
Germany beat Argentina 2-0 the model may attend to the words victorious and win in the source text.

et al., 2014), in which recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) both read and freely generate text, has
made abstractive summarization viable (Chopra
et al., 2016; Nallapati et al., 2016; Rush et al.,
2015; Zeng et al., 2016). Though these systems
are promising, they exhibit undesirable behavior
such as inaccurately reproducing factual details,
an inability to deal with out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
words, and repeating themselves (see Figure 1).

In this paper we present an architecture that
addresses these three issues in the context of
multi-sentence summaries. While most recent ab-
stractive work has focused on headline genera-
tion tasks (reducing one or two sentences to a
single headline), we believe that longer-text sum-
marization is both more challenging (requiring
higher levels of abstraction while avoiding repe-
tition) and ultimately more useful. Therefore we
apply our model to the recently-introduced CNN/
Daily Mail dataset (Hermann et al., 2015; Nallap-
ati et al., 2016), which contains news articles (39
sentences on average) paired with multi-sentence
summaries, and show that we outperform the state-
of-the-art abstractive system by at least 2 ROUGE
points.

Our hybrid pointer-generator network facili-
tates copying words from the source text via point-
ing (Vinyals et al., 2015), which improves accu-
racy and handling of OOV words, while retaining
the ability to generate new words. The network,
which can be viewed as a balance between extrac-
tive and abstractive approaches, is similar to Gu
et al.’s (2016) CopyNet and Miao and Blunsom’s
(2016) Forced-Attention Sentence Compression,

that were applied to short-text summarization. We
propose a novel variant of the coverage vector (Tu
et al., 2016) from Neural Machine Translation,
which we use to track and control coverage of the
source document. We show that coverage is re-
markably effective for eliminating repetition.

2 Our Models

In this section we describe (1) our baseline
(2) our pointer-
sequence-to-sequence model,
generator model, and (3) our coverage mechanism
that can be added to either of the ﬁrst two models.
The code for our models is available online.1

2.1 Sequence-to-sequence attentional model

Our baseline model is similar to that of Nallapati
et al. (2016), and is depicted in Figure 2. The to-
kens of the article wi are fed one-by-one into the
encoder (a single-layer bidirectional LSTM), pro-
ducing a sequence of encoder hidden states hi. On
each step t, the decoder (a single-layer unidirec-
tional LSTM) receives the word embedding of the
previous word (while training, this is the previous
word of the reference summary; at test time it is
the previous word emitted by the decoder), and
has decoder state st. The attention distribution at
is calculated as in Bahdanau et al. (2015):

et
i = vT tanh(Whhi +Wsst + battn)
at = softmax(et)

(1)

(2)

where v, Wh, Ws and battn are learnable parame-
ters. The attention distribution can be viewed as

1www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

Figure 3: Pointer-generator model. For each decoder timestep a generation probability pgen ∈ [0, 1] is
calculated, which weights the probability of generating words from the vocabulary, versus copying words
from the source text. The vocabulary distribution and the attention distribution are weighted and summed
to obtain the ﬁnal distribution, from which we make our prediction. Note that out-of-vocabulary article
words such as 2-0 are included in the ﬁnal distribution. Best viewed in color.

a probability distribution over the source words,
that tells the decoder where to look to produce the
next word. Next, the attention distribution is used
to produce a weighted sum of the encoder hidden
states, known as the context vector h∗
t :
t = ∑i at
h∗
The context vector, which can be seen as a ﬁxed-
size representation of what has been read from the
source for this step, is concatenated with the de-
coder state st and fed through two linear layers to
produce the vocabulary distribution Pvocab:
t ] + b) + b(cid:48))

Pvocab = softmax(V (cid:48)(V [st, h∗

ihi

(4)

(3)

where V , V (cid:48), b and b(cid:48) are learnable parameters.
Pvocab is a probability distribution over all words
in the vocabulary, and provides us with our ﬁnal
distribution from which to predict words w:

P(w) = Pvocab(w)

During training, the loss for timestep t is the neg-
ative log likelihood of the target word w∗
t for that
timestep:

losst = − log P(w∗
t )
and the overall loss for the whole sequence is:

(5)

(6)

(7)

loss =

1

T ∑T

t=0 losst

2.2 Pointer-generator network

Our pointer-generator network is a hybrid between
our baseline and a pointer network (Vinyals et al.,
2015), as it allows both copying words via point-
ing, and generating words from a ﬁxed vocabulary.
In the pointer-generator model (depicted in Figure
3) the attention distribution at and context vector
h∗
t are calculated as in section 2.1. In addition, the
generation probability pgen ∈ [0, 1] for timestep t is
calculated from the context vector h∗
t , the decoder
state st and the decoder input xt:

(8)

h∗h∗

s st + wT

x xt + bptr)

pgen = σ (wT

t + wT
where vectors wh∗, ws, wx and scalar bptr are learn-
able parameters and σ is the sigmoid function.
Next, pgen is used as a soft switch to choose be-
tween generating a word from the vocabulary by
sampling from Pvocab, or copying a word from the
input sequence by sampling from the attention dis-
tribution at. For each document let the extended
vocabulary denote the union of the vocabulary,
and all words appearing in the source document.
We obtain the following probability distribution
over the extended vocabulary:
P(w) = pgenPvocab(w) + (1 − pgen)∑i:wi=w at
Note that if w is an out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
word, then Pvocab(w) is zero; similarly if w does

i (9)

not appear in the source document, then ∑i:wi=w at
i
is zero. The ability to produce OOV words is
one of the primary advantages of pointer-generator
models; by contrast models such as our baseline
are restricted to their pre-set vocabulary.

The loss function is as described in equations
(6) and (7), but with respect to our modiﬁed prob-
ability distribution P(w) given in equation (9).

Our loss function is more ﬂexible: because sum-
marization should not require uniform coverage,
we only penalize the overlap between each atten-
tion distribution and the coverage so far – prevent-
ing repeated attention. Finally, the coverage loss,
reweighted by some hyperparameter λ , is added to
the primary loss function to yield a new composite
loss function:

2.3 Coverage mechanism

Repetition is a common problem for sequence-
to-sequence models (Tu et al., 2016; Mi et al.,
2016; Sankaran et al., 2016; Suzuki and Nagata,
2016), and is especially pronounced when gener-
ating multi-sentence text (see Figure 1). We adapt
the coverage model of Tu et al. (2016) to solve the
problem. In our coverage model, we maintain a
coverage vector ct, which is the sum of attention
distributions over all previous decoder timesteps:

t(cid:48)=0

at(cid:48)

(10)

ct = ∑t−1
Intuitively, ct is a (unnormalized) distribution over
the source document words that represents the de-
gree of coverage that those words have received
from the attention mechanism so far. Note that c0
is a zero vector, because on the ﬁrst timestep, none
of the source document has been covered.

The coverage vector is used as extra input to the

attention mechanism, changing equation (1) to:

i = vT tanh(Whhi +Wsst + wcct
et

i + battn)

(11)

where wc is a learnable parameter vector of same
length as v. This ensures that the attention mecha-
nism’s current decision (choosing where to attend
next) is informed by a reminder of its previous
decisions (summarized in ct). This should make
it easier for the attention mechanism to avoid re-
peatedly attending to the same locations, and thus
avoid generating repetitive text.

We ﬁnd it necessary (see section 5) to addition-
ally deﬁne a coverage loss to penalize repeatedly
attending to the same locations:

covlosst = ∑i min(at

i, ct
i)

(12)

Note that the coverage loss is bounded; in particu-
lar covlosst ≤ ∑i at
i = 1. Equation (12) differs from
the coverage loss used in Machine Translation. In
MT, we assume that there should be a roughly one-
to-one translation ratio; accordingly the ﬁnal cov-
erage vector is penalized if it is more or less than 1.

losst = − log P(w∗

t ) + λ ∑i min(at

i, ct
i)

(13)

3 Related Work

Neural abstractive summarization. Rush et al.
(2015) were the ﬁrst to apply modern neural net-
works to abstractive text summarization, achiev-
ing state-of-the-art performance on DUC-2004
and Gigaword, two sentence-level summarization
datasets. Their approach, which is centered on the
attention mechanism, has been augmented with re-
current decoders (Chopra et al., 2016), Abstract
Meaning Representations (Takase et al., 2016), hi-
erarchical networks (Nallapati et al., 2016), vari-
ational autoencoders (Miao and Blunsom, 2016),
and direct optimization of the performance metric
(Ranzato et al., 2016), further improving perfor-
mance on those datasets.

However, large-scale datasets for summariza-
tion of longer text are rare. Nallapati et al. (2016)
adapted the DeepMind question-answering dataset
(Hermann et al., 2015) for summarization, result-
ing in the CNN/Daily Mail dataset, and provided
the ﬁrst abstractive baselines. The same authors
then published a neural extractive approach (Nal-
lapati et al., 2017), which uses hierarchical RNNs
to select sentences, and found that it signiﬁcantly
outperformed their abstractive result with respect
to the ROUGE metric. To our knowledge, these
are the only two published results on the full data-
set.

Prior to modern neural methods, abstractive
summarization received less attention than extrac-
tive summarization, but Jing (2000) explored cut-
ting unimportant parts of sentences to create sum-
maries, and Cheung and Penn (2014) explore sen-
tence fusion using dependency trees.

Pointer-generator networks. The pointer net-
work (Vinyals et al., 2015) is a sequence-to-
sequence model that uses the soft attention dis-
tribution of Bahdanau et al.
(2015) to produce
an output sequence consisting of elements from

the input sequence. The pointer network has been
used to create hybrid approaches for NMT (Gul-
cehre et al., 2016), language modeling (Merity
et al., 2016), and summarization (Gu et al., 2016;
Gulcehre et al., 2016; Miao and Blunsom, 2016;
Nallapati et al., 2016; Zeng et al., 2016).

Our approach is close to the Forced-Attention
Sentence Compression model of Miao and Blun-
som (2016) and the CopyNet model of Gu et al.
(2016), with some small differences: (i) We cal-
culate an explicit switch probability pgen, whereas
Gu et al. induce competition through a shared soft-
max function. (ii) We recycle the attention distri-
bution to serve as the copy distribution, but Gu et
al. use two separate distributions.
(iii) When a
word appears multiple times in the source text, we
sum probability mass from all corresponding parts
of the attention distribution, whereas Miao and
Blunsom do not. Our reasoning is that (i) calcu-
lating an explicit pgen usefully enables us to raise
or lower the probability of all generated words or
all copy words at once, rather than individually,
(ii) the two distributions serve such similar pur-
poses that we ﬁnd our simpler approach sufﬁces,
and (iii) we observe that the pointer mechanism
often copies a word while attending to multiple oc-
currences of it in the source text.

Our approach is considerably different from
that of Gulcehre et al. (2016) and Nallapati et al.
(2016). Those works train their pointer compo-
nents to activate only for out-of-vocabulary words
or named entities (whereas we allow our model to
freely learn when to use the pointer), and they do
not mix the probabilities from the copy distribu-
tion and the vocabulary distribution. We believe
the mixture approach described here is better for
abstractive summarization – in section 6 we show
that the copy mechanism is vital for accurately
reproducing rare but in-vocabulary words, and in
section 7.2 we observe that the mixture model en-
ables the language model and copy mechanism to
work together to perform abstractive copying.

Coverage. Originating from Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (Koehn, 2009), coverage was
adapted for NMT by Tu et al. (2016) and Mi et al.
(2016), who both use a GRU to update the cov-
erage vector each step. We ﬁnd that a simpler
approach – summing the attention distributions to
obtain the coverage vector – sufﬁces. In this re-
spect our approach is similar to Xu et al. (2015),
who apply a coverage-like method to image cap-

tioning, and Chen et al. (2016), who also incorpo-
rate a coverage mechanism (which they call ‘dis-
traction’) as described in equation (11) into neural
summarization of longer text.

Temporal attention is a related technique that
has been applied to NMT (Sankaran et al., 2016)
and summarization (Nallapati et al., 2016).
In
this approach, each attention distribution is di-
vided by the sum of the previous, which effec-
tively dampens repeated attention. We tried this
method but found it too destructive, distorting the
signal from the attention mechanism and reducing
performance. We hypothesize that an early inter-
vention method such as coverage is preferable to
a post hoc method such as temporal attention – it
is better to inform the attention mechanism to help
it make better decisions, than to override its de-
cisions altogether. This theory is supported by the
large boost that coverage gives our ROUGE scores
(see Table 1), compared to the smaller boost given
by temporal attention for the same task (Nallapati
et al., 2016).

4 Dataset

We use the CNN/Daily Mail dataset (Hermann
et al., 2015; Nallapati et al., 2016), which con-
tains online news articles (781 tokens on average)
paired with multi-sentence summaries (3.75 sen-
tences or 56 tokens on average). We used scripts
supplied by Nallapati et al. (2016) to obtain the
same version of the the data, which has 287,226
training pairs, 13,368 validation pairs and 11,490
test pairs. Both the dataset’s published results
(Nallapati et al., 2016, 2017) use the anonymized
version of the data, which has been pre-processed
to replace each named entity, e.g., The United Na-
tions, with its own unique identiﬁer for the exam-
ple pair, e.g., @entity5. By contrast, we operate
directly on the original text (or non-anonymized
version of the data),2 which we believe is the fa-
vorable problem to solve because it requires no
pre-processing.

5 Experiments

all

experiments,

our model has 256-
For
dimensional hidden states and 128-dimensional
word embeddings. For the pointer-generator mod-
els, we use a vocabulary of 50k words for both
source and target – note that due to the pointer net-
work’s ability to handle OOV words, we can use

2at www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

METEOR
exact match + stem/syn/para

abstractive model (Nallapati et al., 2016)*
seq-to-seq + attn baseline (150k vocab)
seq-to-seq + attn baseline (50k vocab)
pointer-generator
pointer-generator + coverage
lead-3 baseline (ours)
lead-3 baseline (Nallapati et al., 2017)*
extractive model (Nallapati et al., 2017)*

ROUGE
2
13.30
11.17
11.81
15.66
17.28
17.70
15.7
16.2

L
32.65
28.08
28.83
33.42
36.38
36.57
35.5
35.3

1
35.46
30.49
31.33
36.44
39.53
40.34
39.2
39.6

-
11.65
12.03
15.35
17.32
20.48
-
-

-
12.86
13.20
16.65
18.72
22.21
-
-

Table 1: ROUGE F1 and METEOR scores on the test set. Models and baselines in the top half are
abstractive, while those in the bottom half are extractive. Those marked with * were trained and evaluated
on the anonymized dataset, and so are not strictly comparable to our results on the original text. All our
ROUGE scores have a 95% conﬁdence interval of at most ±0.25 as reported by the ofﬁcial ROUGE
script. The METEOR improvement from the 50k baseline to the pointer-generator model, and from the
pointer-generator to the pointer-generator+coverage model, were both found to be statistically signiﬁcant
using an approximate randomization test with p < 0.01.

a smaller vocabulary size than Nallapati et al.’s
(2016) 150k source and 60k target vocabularies.
For the baseline model, we also try a larger vocab-
ulary size of 150k.

Note that the pointer and the coverage mecha-
nism introduce very few additional parameters to
the network: for the models with vocabulary size
50k, the baseline model has 21,499,600 parame-
ters, the pointer-generator adds 1153 extra param-
eters (wh∗, ws, wx and bptr in equation 8), and cov-
erage adds 512 extra parameters (wc in equation
11).

Unlike Nallapati et al. (2016), we do not pre-
train the word embeddings – they are learned
from scratch during training. We train using Ada-
grad (Duchi et al., 2011) with learning rate 0.15
and an initial accumulator value of 0.1.
(This
was found to work best of Stochastic Gradient
Descent, Adadelta, Momentum, Adam and RM-
SProp). We use gradient clipping with a maximum
gradient norm of 2, but do not use any form of reg-
ularization. We use loss on the validation set to
implement early stopping.

During training and at test time we truncate the
article to 400 tokens and limit the length of the
summary to 100 tokens for training and 120 to-
kens at test time.3 This is done to expedite train-
ing and testing, but we also found that truncating
the article can raise the performance of the model

3The upper limit of 120 is mostly invisible:

the beam
search algorithm is self-stopping and almost never reaches
the 120th step.

(see section 7.1 for more details). For training,
we found it efﬁcient to start with highly-truncated
sequences, then raise the maximum length once
converged. We train on a single Tesla K40m GPU
with a batch size of 16. At test time our summaries
are produced using beam search with beam size 4.

We trained both our baseline models for about
600,000 iterations (33 epochs) – this is similar
to the 35 epochs required by Nallapati et al.’s
(2016) best model. Training took 4 days and 14
hours for the 50k vocabulary model, and 8 days 21
hours for the 150k vocabulary model. We found
the pointer-generator model quicker to train, re-
quiring less than 230,000 training iterations (12.8
In par-
epochs); a total of 3 days and 4 hours.
ticular, the pointer-generator model makes much
quicker progress in the early phases of training.
To obtain our ﬁnal coverage model, we added the
coverage mechanism with coverage loss weighted
to λ = 1 (as described in equation 13), and trained
for a further 3000 iterations (about 2 hours).
In
this time the coverage loss converged to about 0.2,
down from an initial value of about 0.5. We also
tried a more aggressive value of λ = 2; this re-
duced coverage loss but increased the primary loss
function, thus we did not use it.

We tried training the coverage model without
the loss function, hoping that the attention mech-
anism may learn by itself not to attend repeatedly
to the same locations, but we found this to be inef-
fective, with no discernible reduction in repetition.
We also tried training with coverage from the ﬁrst

iteration rather than as a separate training phase,
but found that in the early phase of training, the
coverage objective interfered with the main objec-
tive, reducing overall performance.

6 Results

6.1 Preliminaries

Our results are given in Table 1. We evalu-
ate our models with the standard ROUGE metric
(Lin, 2004b), reporting the F1 scores for ROUGE-
1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L (which respectively
measure the word-overlap, bigram-overlap, and
longest common sequence between the reference
summary and the summary to be evaluated). We
obtain our ROUGE scores using the pyrouge
package.4 We also evaluate with the METEOR
metric (Denkowski and Lavie, 2014), both in ex-
act match mode (rewarding only exact matches
between words) and full mode (which addition-
ally rewards matching stems, synonyms and para-
phrases).5

In addition to our own models, we also report
the lead-3 baseline (which uses the ﬁrst three sen-
tences of the article as a summary), and compare
to the only existing abstractive (Nallapati et al.,
2016) and extractive (Nallapati et al., 2017) mod-
els on the full dataset. The output of our models is
available online.6

Given that we generate plain-text summaries but
Nallapati et al. (2016; 2017) generate anonymized
summaries (see Section 4), our ROUGE scores
are not strictly comparable. There is evidence
to suggest that the original-text dataset may re-
sult in higher ROUGE scores in general than the
anonymized dataset – the lead-3 baseline is higher
on the former than the latter. One possible expla-
nation is that multi-word named entities lead to
a higher rate of n-gram overlap. Unfortunately,
ROUGE is the only available means of compar-
ison with Nallapati et al.’s work. Nevertheless,
given that the disparity in the lead-3 scores is
(+1.1 ROUGE-1, +2.0 ROUGE-2, +1.1 ROUGE-
L) points respectively, and our best model scores
exceed Nallapati et al. (2016) by (+4.07 ROUGE-
1, +3.98 ROUGE-2, +3.73 ROUGE-L) points, we
may estimate that we outperform the only previous
abstractive system by at least 2 ROUGE points all-
round.

4pypi.python.org/pypi/pyrouge/0.1.3
5www.cs.cmu.edu/~alavie/METEOR
6www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

30

20

10

s
e
t
a
c
i
l
p
u
d

e
r
a

t
a
h
t

%

0
1 - g r a

m s

m s

2 - g r a

m s

3 - g r a

4 - g r a

m s

n t e

s e

e s

c

n

pointer-generator, no coverage
pointer-generator + coverage
reference summaries

Figure 4: Coverage eliminates undesirable repe-
tition. Summaries from our non-coverage model
contain many duplicated n-grams while our cover-
age model produces a similar number as the ref-
erence summaries.

6.2 Observations

We ﬁnd that both our baseline models perform
poorly with respect to ROUGE and METEOR, and
in fact the larger vocabulary size (150k) does not
seem to help. Even the better-performing baseline
(with 50k vocabulary) produces summaries with
several common problems. Factual details are fre-
quently reproduced incorrectly, often replacing an
uncommon (but in-vocabulary) word with a more-
common alternative. For example in Figure 1,
the baseline model appears to struggle with the
rare word thwart, producing destabilize instead,
which leads to the fabricated phrase destabilize
nigeria’s economy. Even more catastrophically,
the summaries sometimes devolve into repetitive
nonsense, such as the third sentence produced by
the baseline model in Figure 1.
In addition, the
baseline model can’t reproduce out-of-vocabulary
words (such as muhammadu buhari in Figure 1).
Further examples of all these problems are pro-
vided in the supplementary material.

Our pointer-generator model achieves much
better ROUGE and METEOR scores than the
baseline, despite many fewer training epochs. The
difference in the summaries is also marked: out-
of-vocabulary words are handled easily, factual
details are almost always copied correctly, and
there are no fabrications (see Figure 1). However,
repetition is still very common.

Our pointer-generator model with coverage im-
proves the ROUGE and METEOR scores further,
convincingly surpassing the best abstractive model

Article: smugglers lure arab and african migrants by offer-
ing discounts to get onto overcrowded ships if people bring
more potential passengers, a cnn investigation has revealed.
(...)
Summary: cnn investigation uncovers the business inside
a human smuggling ring.

Article: eyewitness video showing white north charleston
police ofﬁcer michael slager shooting to death an unarmed
black man has exposed discrepancies in the reports of the
ﬁrst ofﬁcers on the scene. (...)
Summary: more questions than answers emerge in con-
troversial s.c. police shooting.

Figure 5: Examples of highly abstractive reference
summaries (bold denotes novel words).

of Nallapati et al.
(2016) by several ROUGE
points. Despite the brevity of the coverage train-
ing phase (about 1% of the total training time),
the repetition problem is almost completely elimi-
nated, which can be seen both qualitatively (Figure
1) and quantitatively (Figure 4). However, our best
model does not quite surpass the ROUGE scores
of the lead-3 baseline, nor the current best extrac-
tive model (Nallapati et al., 2017). We discuss this
issue in section 7.1.

7 Discussion

7.1 Comparison with extractive systems

It is clear from Table 1 that extractive systems tend
to achieve higher ROUGE scores than abstractive,
and that the extractive lead-3 baseline is extremely
strong (even the best extractive system beats it by
only a small margin). We offer two possible ex-
planations for these observations.

Firstly, news articles tend to be structured with
the most important information at the start; this
partially explains the strength of the lead-3 base-
line. Indeed, we found that using only the ﬁrst 400
tokens (about 20 sentences) of the article yielded
signiﬁcantly higher ROUGE scores than using the
ﬁrst 800 tokens.

Secondly, the nature of the task and the ROUGE
metric make extractive approaches and the lead-
3 baseline difﬁcult to beat. The choice of con-
tent for the reference summaries is quite subjective
– sometimes the sentences form a self-contained
summary; other times they simply showcase a few
interesting details from the article. Given that the
articles contain 39 sentences on average, there are
many equally valid ways to choose 3 or 4 high-
lights in this style. Abstraction introduces even
more options (choice of phrasing), further decreas-

ing the likelihood of matching the reference sum-
mary. For example, smugglers proﬁt from des-
perate migrants is a valid alternative abstractive
summary for the ﬁrst example in Figure 5, but
it scores 0 ROUGE with respect to the reference
summary. This inﬂexibility of ROUGE is exac-
erbated by only having one reference summary,
which has been shown to lower ROUGE’s relia-
bility compared to multiple reference summaries
(Lin, 2004a).

Due to the subjectivity of the task and thus
the diversity of valid summaries, it seems that
ROUGE rewards safe strategies such as select-
ing the ﬁrst-appearing content, or preserving orig-
inal phrasing. While the reference summaries do
sometimes deviate from these techniques, those
deviations are unpredictable enough that the safer
strategy obtains higher ROUGE scores on average.
This may explain why extractive systems tend to
obtain higher ROUGE scores than abstractive, and
even extractive systems do not signiﬁcantly ex-
ceed the lead-3 baseline.

To explore this issue further, we evaluated our
systems with the METEOR metric, which rewards
not only exact word matches, but also matching
stems, synonyms and paraphrases (from a pre-
deﬁned list). We observe that all our models re-
ceive over 1 METEOR point boost by the inclu-
sion of stem, synonym and paraphrase matching,
indicating that they may be performing some ab-
straction. However, we again observe that the
lead-3 baseline is not surpassed by our models.
It may be that news article style makes the lead-
3 baseline very strong with respect to any metric.
We believe that investigating this issue further is
an important direction for future work.

7.2 How abstractive is our model?

We have shown that our pointer mechanism makes
our abstractive system more reliable, copying fac-
tual details correctly more often. But does the ease
of copying make our system any less abstractive?
Figure 6 shows that our ﬁnal model’s sum-
maries contain a much lower rate of novel n-grams
(i.e., those that don’t appear in the article) than the
reference summaries, indicating a lower degree of
abstraction. Note that the baseline model produces
novel n-grams more frequently – however, this
statistic includes all the incorrectly copied words,
UNK tokens and fabrications alongside the good
instances of abstraction.

l
e
v
o
n

e
r
a

t
a
h
t

%

100
80
60
40
20
0
1 - g r a

m s

m s

2 - g r a

m s

3 - g r a

4 - g r a

m s

n t e

s e

e s

c

n

pointer-generator + coverage
sequence-to-sequence + attention baseline
reference summaries

Figure 6: Although our best model is abstractive,
it does not produce novel n-grams (i.e., n-grams
that don’t appear in the source text) as often as
the reference summaries. The baseline model
produces more novel n-grams, but many of these
are erroneous (see section 7.2).

Article: andy murray (...) is into the semi-ﬁnals of the mi-
ami open , but not before getting a scare from 21 year-old
austrian dominic thiem, who pushed him to 4-4 in the sec-
ond set before going down 3-6 6-4, 6-1 in an hour and three
quarters. (...)
Summary: andy murray defeated dominic thiem 3-6 6-4,
6-1 in an hour and three quarters.

Article: (...) wayne rooney smashes home during manch-
ester united ’s 3-1 win over aston villa on saturday. (...)
Summary: manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old
trafford on saturday.

Figure 7: Examples of abstractive summaries pro-
duced by our model (bold denotes novel words).

In particular, Figure 6 shows that our ﬁnal
model copies whole article sentences 35% of the
time; by comparison the reference summaries do
so only 1.3% of the time. This is a main area for
improvement, as we would like our model to move
beyond simple sentence extraction. However, we
observe that the other 65% encompasses a range of
abstractive techniques. Article sentences are trun-
cated to form grammatically-correct shorter ver-
sions, and new sentences are composed by stitch-
ing together fragments. Unnecessary interjections,
clauses and parenthesized phrases are sometimes
omitted from copied passages. Some of these abil-
ities are demonstrated in Figure 1, and the supple-
mentary material contains more examples.

Figure 7 shows two examples of more impres-
sive abstraction – both with similar structure. The
dataset contains many sports stories whose sum-
maries follow the X beat Y (cid:104)score(cid:105) on (cid:104)day(cid:105) tem-

plate, which may explain why our model is most
conﬁdently abstractive on these examples. In gen-
eral however, our model does not routinely pro-
duce summaries like those in Figure 7, and is not
close to producing summaries like in Figure 5.

The value of the generation probability pgen
also gives a measure of the abstractiveness of our
model. During training, pgen starts with a value
of about 0.30 then increases, converging to about
0.53 by the end of training. This indicates that
the model ﬁrst learns to mostly copy, then learns
to generate about half the time. However at test
time, pgen is heavily skewed towards copying, with
a mean value of 0.17. The disparity is likely
due to the fact that during training, the model re-
ceives word-by-word supervision in the form of
the reference summary, but at test time it does
not. Nonetheless, the generator module is use-
ful even when the model is copying. We ﬁnd
that pgen is highest at times of uncertainty such
as the beginning of sentences, the join between
stitched-together fragments, and when producing
periods that truncate a copied sentence. Our mix-
ture model allows the network to copy while si-
multaneously consulting the language model – en-
abling operations like stitching and truncation to
In any case,
be performed with grammaticality.
encouraging the pointer-generator model to write
more abstractively, while retaining the accuracy
advantages of the pointer module, is an exciting
direction for future work.

8 Conclusion

In this work we presented a hybrid pointer-
generator architecture with coverage, and showed
that it reduces inaccuracies and repetition. We ap-
plied our model to a new and challenging long-
text dataset, and signiﬁcantly outperformed the
abstractive state-of-the-art result. Our model ex-
hibits many abstractive abilities, but attaining
higher levels of abstraction remains an open re-
search question.

9 Acknowledgment

We thank the ACL reviewers for their helpful com-
ments. This work was begun while the ﬁrst author
was an intern at Google Brain and continued at
Stanford. Stanford University gratefully acknowl-
edges the support of the DARPA DEFT Program
AFRL contract no. FA8750-13-2-0040. Any opin-
ions in this material are those of the authors alone.

References

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.

Qian Chen, Xiaodan Zhu, Zhenhua Ling, Si Wei, and
Hui Jiang. 2016. Distraction-based neural networks
In International Joint
for modeling documents.
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

Jackie Chi Kit Cheung and Gerald Penn. 2014. Unsu-
pervised sentence enhancement for automatic sum-
marization. In Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Alexander M Rush.
2016. Abstractive sentence summarization with at-
In North Amer-
tentive recurrent neural networks.
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2014. Meteor
universal: Language speciﬁc translation evaluation
In EACL 2014 Workshop
for any target language.
on Statistical Machine Translation.

John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. 2011.
Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning
Journal of Machine
and stochastic optimization.
Learning Research 12:2121–2159.

Jiatao Gu, Zhengdong Lu, Hang Li, and Victor OK
Incorporating copying mechanism in
In Association for

Li. 2016.
sequence-to-sequence learning.
Computational Linguistics.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004b. Rouge: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. In Text summariza-
tion branches out: ACL workshop.

Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and
Pointer sentinel mixture
Richard Socher. 2016.
In NIPS 2016 Workshop on Multi-class
models.
and Multi-label Learning in Extremely Large Label
Spaces.

Haitao Mi, Baskaran Sankaran, Zhiguo Wang, and Abe
Ittycheriah. 2016. Coverage embedding models for
neural machine translation. In Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing.

Yishu Miao and Phil Blunsom. 2016. Language as a
latent variable: Discrete generative models for sen-
tence compression. In Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing.

Ramesh Nallapati, Feifei Zhai, and Bowen Zhou. 2017.
SummaRuNNer: A recurrent neural network based
sequence model for extractive summarization of
documents. In Association for the Advancement of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Cicero dos Santos,
C¸ aglar Gulc¸ehre, and Bing Xiang. 2016. Abstrac-
tive text summarization using sequence-to-sequence
RNNs and beyond. In Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning.

Chris D Paice. 1990. Constructing literature abstracts
by computer: techniques and prospects. Information
Processing & Management 26(1):171–186.

Caglar Gulcehre, Sungjin Ahn, Ramesh Nallapati,
Bowen Zhou, and Yoshua Bengio. 2016. Pointing
In Association for Computa-
the unknown words.
tional Linguistics.

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli,
and Wojciech Zaremba. 2016. Sequence level train-
ing with recurrent neural networks. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.

Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward
Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Su-
leyman, and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching ma-
chines to read and comprehend. In Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems.

Hongyan Jing. 2000. Sentence reduction for automatic
In Applied natural language

text summarization.
processing.

Philipp Koehn. 2009. Statistical machine translation.

Cambridge University Press.

Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen, and Francine Chen. 1995.
A trainable document summarizer. In International
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004a.

Looking for a few good
metrics: Automatic summarization evaluation-how
In NACSIS/NII Test
many samples are enough?
Collection for Information Retrieval (NTCIR) Work-
shop.

Alexander M Rush, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston.
2015. A neural attention model for abstractive sen-
tence summarization. In Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing.

Horacio Saggion and Thierry Poibeau. 2013. Auto-
matic text summarization: Past, present and future.
In Multi-source, Multilingual Information Extrac-
tion and Summarization, Springer, pages 3–21.

Baskaran Sankaran, Haitao Mi, Yaser Al-Onaizan, and
Abe Ittycheriah. 2016. Temporal attention model
arXiv preprint
for neural machine translation.
arXiv:1608.02927 .

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Neural Information Processing Systems.

Jun Suzuki and Masaaki Nagata. 2016. RNN-based
encoder-decoder approach with word frequency es-
timation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.00138 .

Sho Takase, Jun Suzuki, Naoaki Okazaki, Tsutomu Hi-
rao, and Masaaki Nagata. 2016. Neural headline
generation on abstract meaning representation.
In
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing.

Zhaopeng Tu, Zhengdong Lu, Yang Liu, Xiaohua Liu,
and Hang Li. 2016. Modeling coverage for neural
In Association for Computa-
machine translation.
tional Linguistics.

Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly.
2015. Pointer networks. In Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems.

Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho,
Aaron C Courville, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Richard S
Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show, attend and
tell: Neural image caption generation with visual
attention. In International Conference on Machine
Learning.

Wenyuan Zeng, Wenjie Luo, Sanja Fidler, and Raquel
Efﬁcient summarization with
arXiv preprint

Urtasun. 2016.
read-again and copy mechanism.
arXiv:1611.03382 .

Supplementary Material

This appendix provides examples from the test set, with side-by-side comparisons of the reference sum-
maries and the summaries produced by our models. In each example:

• italics denote out-of-vocabulary words

• red denotes factual errors in the summaries

• green shading intensity represents the value of the generation probability pgen

• yellow shading intensity represents ﬁnal value of the coverage vector at the end of ﬁnal model’s

summarization process.

Article (truncated): andy murray came close to giving himself some extra preparation time for

his wedding next week before ensuring that he still has unﬁnished tennis business to attend to .

the world no 4 is into the semi-ﬁnals of the miami open , but not before getting a scare from
21 year-old austrian dominic thiem , who pushed him to 4-4 in the second set before going

down 3-6 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters . murray was awaiting the winner from the

last eight match between tomas berdych and argentina ’s juan monaco . prior to this tournament
thiem lost in the second round of a challenger event to soon-to-be new brit aljaz bedene . andy
murray pumps his ﬁrst after defeating dominic thiem to reach the miami open semi ﬁnals .
muray throws his sweatband into the crowd after completing a 3-6 , 6-4 , 6-1 victory in ﬂorida
. murray shakes hands with thiem who he described as a ’ strong guy ’ after the game . and

murray has a fairly simple message for any of his fellow british tennis players who might be

agitated about his imminent arrival into the home ranks : do n’t complain . instead the british no

1 believes his colleagues should use the assimilation of the world number 83 , originally from

slovenia , as motivation to better themselves .

Reference Summary:
british no 1 defeated dominic thiem in miami open quarter ﬁnals .
andy murray celebrated his 500th career win in the previous round .
third seed will play the winner of tomas berdych and juan monaco in the semi ﬁnals of the atp masters
1000 event in key biscayne .

Baseline:
andy murray beat UNK bedene 6-3 , 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters .
british no 1 believes his colleagues should use the maze of the world number 83 , originally from
slovenia , as motivation to better themselves .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
andy murray came close to giving himself some extra preparation for his wedding next week before
getting a scare from 21 year-old austrian dominic thiem .
the world no 4 is into the semi-ﬁnals of the miami open , but not before getting a scare from 21 year-old
austrian dominic thiem .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
andy murray defeated dominic thiem 3-6 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters .

murray was awaiting the winner from the last eight match between tomas berdych and argentina

’s juan monaco .

prior to this tournament thiem lost in the second round of a challenger event to soon-to-be new
brit aljaz bedene .

Figure 8: The baseline model reports the wrong score 6-3, substitutes bedene for thiem and strug-
gles with the uncommon word assimilation. The pointer-network models accurately reproduce the out-
of-vocabulary words thiem and aljaz. Note that the ﬁnal model produces the novel word defeated to
incorporate several fragments into a single sentence.

Article (truncated): munster have signed new zealand international francis saili on a two-year
deal . utility back saili , who made his all blacks debut against argentina in 2013 , will move

to the province later this year after the completion of his 2015 contractual commitments . the
24-year-old currently plays for auckland-based super rugby side the blues and was part of the
new zealand under-20 side that won the junior world championship in italy in 2011 . saili ’s

signature is something of a coup for munster and head coach anthony foley believes he will
be a great addition to their backline . francis saili has signed a two-year deal to join munster

and will link up with them later this year . ’ we are really pleased that francis has committed

his future to the province , ’ foley told munster ’s ofﬁcial website . ’ he is a talented centre
with an impressive skill-set and he possesses the physical attributes to excel

in the northern

hemisphere . ’ i believe he will be a great addition to our backline and we look forward to
welcoming him to munster . ’ saili has been capped twice by new zealand and was part of the

under 20 side that won the junior championship in 2011 .

Reference Summary:
utility back francis saili will join up with munster later this year .
the new zealand international has signed a two-year contract .
saili made his debut for the all blacks against argentina in 2013 .

Baseline:
dutch international francis UNK has signed a two-year deal to join irish UNK super rugby side the
blues .
UNK ’s signature is something of a coup for munster and his head coach anthony foley believes he will
be a great addition to their respective prospects .
UNK has been capped twice by new zealand .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
new zealand international francis saili will move to the province later this year .
utility back saili made his all blacks debut against argentina in 2013 .
utility back saili will move to the province later this year .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
francis saili has signed a two-year deal to join munster later this year .

the 24-year-old was part of

the new zealand under-20 side that won the junior world

championship in italy in 2011 .
saili ’s signature is something of a coup for munster and head coach anthony foley .

Figure 9: The baseline model incorrectly substitutes dutch for new zealand (perhaps reﬂecting the Euro-
pean bias of the dataset), fabricates irish, and struggles with out-of-vocabulary words saili and auckland-
based. Though it is not clear why, the phrase addition to our backline is changed to the nonsensical
addition to their respective prospects. The pointer-generator model ﬁxes these accuracy problems, and
the addition of coverage ﬁxes the repetition problem. Note that the ﬁnal model skips over large passages
of text to produce shorter sentences.

Article (truncated): right from the moment he breezed through the doors at old trafford , louis

van gaal was a man with a plan . the ﬁrst season , he stated , would see him deliver manchester

united back into their rightful place in the champions league . he would restore them to the
premier league top four but loftier aims of silverware would have to wait . his three-year vision

would allow for such thoughts but , ﬁrst things ﬁrst , united needed to be dining from european
football ’s top table again . louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning

man united into champions league . wayne rooney smashes home during manchester united ’s

3-1 win over aston villa on saturday . united ’s win over aston villa took them third , eight

points ahead of ﬁfth-placed liverpool in the table . april 12 manchester city ( h ) . april 18

chelsea ( a ) . april 26 everton ( a ) . may 2 west bromwich albion ( h ) . may 9 crystal

palace ( a ) . may 17 arsenal ( h ) . may 24 hull city ( a ) . one season out of the champions

league was far from ideal , but two seasons would be an absolute disaster and something , he

understood , that would not be tolerated . in november , even that was looking optimistic . a

1-0 defeat to manchester city meant that united had taken just 13 points from their opening 10

matches - it was their worst start to a league campaign since 1986 , when ron atkinson only

lasted until november .

Reference Summary:
man united have an eight-point cushion from ﬁfth-place liverpool .
van gaal looks likely to deliver on his promise of top four ﬁnish .
but the dutchman has a three-year vision mapped out .
next season will have to see united mount sustained challenge for title .
they must also reach the later stages of the champions league .

Baseline:
manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old trafford on saturday .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his UNK aim of returning man united into the premier league top
four .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his UNK aim of returning man united into champions league .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions league.
united ’s win over aston villa took them third , eight points ahead of ﬁfth-placed liverpool in the table .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions league.

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old trafford on saturday .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions

league .

united needed to be dining from european football ’s top table again .

Figure 10: In this example, both our baseline model and ﬁnal model produce a completely abstractive
ﬁrst sentence, using a novel word beat.

Article (truncated): having been on the receiving end of a 6-1 thumping , a defeat like that

could be justiﬁably met with a backlash by angry supporters . watching a 3-1 ﬁrst leg aggregate

advantage turn into a 7-4 deﬁcit come the end of the reverse encounter too could send many
fans apoplectic at

the capitulation of their side . however that does n’t appear the case for

those devoted to porto . porto supporters gave their team a hero ’s welcome following their

6-1 defeat at bayern munich on tuesday . porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many
players to look perplexed by their warm reception . porto boss julen lopetegui ( left ) was

hugged by fans congratulating him on their champions league run . police escorts were needed

to keep the delirious supporters at bay as the porto team bus drove past . the team bus was met

with a cacophony of noise from porto supporters proudly chanting about their club . on their

return from a humiliating champions league quarter-ﬁnal loss at the hands of bayern munich on

tuesday night , the squad were given a heroes reception as they arrived back in portugal . in the

early hours of wednesday morning , fans mobbed the squad congratulating them on their run
in the tournament . star striker jackson martinez and ricardo quaresma were one of many porto

players who looked perplexed as they were hugged by fans before they making their way on to
the team bus - set upon a cacophony of ﬁercely-proud chanting . it was the ﬁrst time that porto

, who had been unbeaten in this season ’s tournament up until tuesday night , had reached the

quarter-ﬁnals of the champions league since the 2008-09 season .

Reference Summary:
bayern munich beat porto 6-1 in their champions league tie on tuesday .
result saw bayern win quarter-ﬁnal encounter 7-4 on aggregate .
it was the ﬁrst-time porto had reached that stage since the 2008-09 season .

Baseline:
porto beat bayern munich 2-0 in the champions league on tuesday night .
porto star james UNK was one of many players involved in the match .
the squad were given a trophy as they arrived back in portugal .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm

porto boss julen lopetegui was hugged by fans congratulating him on their champions league

reception .

run .

however that does n’t appear the case for those devoted to porto .

police escorts were needed to keep the delirious supporters at bay .

Figure 11: The baseline model makes several factual inaccuracies: it claims porto beat bayern munich
not vice versa, the score is changed from 7-4 to 2-0, jackson is changed to james and a heroes reception
is replaced with a trophy. Our ﬁnal model produces sentences that are individually accurate, but they
do not make sense as a whole. Note that the ﬁnal model omits the parenthesized phrase ( left ) from its
second sentence.

Article:
( cnn ) ” it ’s showtime ! ” michael keaton paid homage – ever so slightly – to
his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third turn hosting “ saturday night live ”

this weekend . keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since

he ﬁrst hosted the comedy sketch show in 1982 . “ i had a baby – he ’s 31 . i also have

a new girlfriend – she ’s 28 , ” he said . fans who were hoping for a full-blown revival of

keaton ’s most memorable characters might have been a little disappointed . snl cast members
taran killam and bobby moynihan begged the actor with a song to “ play ” batman and
beetlejuice with them . all they got in response were a couple of one-liners . overall , keaton

’s performance drew high marks from viewers and critics for its “ deadpan ” manner and “
unpredictable weirdness , ” in the words of a.v . club ’s dennis perkins . fans also delighted
in a cameo from “ walking dead ” star norman reedus during weekend update . keaton scored

some laughs from the audience as an ad executive who ’s not very good at his job , a confused

grandfather and a high school teacher who gets asked to the prom in a riff on the romantic
comedy “ she ’s all that . ” other crowd-pleasing spots included a scientology parody music
video and a news conference spooﬁng the ncaa student-athlete debate . the show also poked fun

at cnn with cast member cecily strong playing anchor brooke baldwin . baldwin said on twitter

that she ’s taking it as a “ crazy compliment ” and shared a clip from the skit .

Reference Summary:
michael keaton hosted “ saturday night live ” for the ﬁrst time in 1982 .
in 2015 , his nods to starring roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” are brief .

Baseline:
“ snl ” wins “ saturday night live ” .
keaton acknowledged in his opening “ saturday night live ” .
keaton acknowledged in his opening night ’s “ UNK ” .
the show also pokes fun at cnn with cast member mariah carey .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
“ beetlejuice ” michael keaton paid homage to his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third
turn hosting “ saturday night live ” this weekend .
keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since he ﬁrst hosted the comedy
sketch show in 1982 .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
michael keaton paid homage to his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third turn

hosting “ saturday night live ” .

comedy sketch show in 1982 .

keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since he ﬁrst hosted the

Figure 12: Baseline model replaces cecily strong with mariah carey, and produces generally nonsensical
output. The baseline model may be struggling with the out-of-vocabulary word beetlejuice, or perhaps
the unusual non-news format of the article. Note that the ﬁnal model omits – ever so slightly – from its
ﬁrst sentence.

Article (truncated): they are supposed to be the dream team who can solve the conundrum

of how to win the election . but david cameron and boris johnson were left scratching their

heads today as they struggled with a children ’s jigsaw teaching toddlers about

the seasons

. as the london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands , the prime

minister tried out what could be a new election slogan , telling him : ’ if in doubt , wedge it

in . ’ after being put right by a four-year-old who spotted their errors , the pair had more fun

ﬁnger painting with tory blue paint . david cameron and boris johnson were left stumped by
the puzzle at advantage children ’s day nursery in surbiton , as three-year-old stephanie looked

on . when they tried to put the puzzle back together , they hit trouble after it proved to be

more difﬁcult than expected . the conservative duo made their ﬁrst appearance together on the
campaign trail with a visit to advantage day nursery in surbiton , south west london . they were

supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare for 600,000 children aged three

and four . they sat at a table with joshua and stephanie , both aged three , and four-year-olds

hamish and leo where they broke up a puzzle which depicted the four seasons . when they tried

to put it back together , they hit trouble after it proved to be more difﬁcult than expected .

Reference Summary:
david cameron and boris johnson visit nursery to promote childcare .
duo left ﬂummoxed by jigsaw aimed at teaching children about seasons .
london mayor resorted to brute force to hammer wrong pieces together .
prime minister gave his approval , telling boris : ’ if in doubt , wedge it in ’ .

Baseline:
david cameron and boris johnson were left mystiﬁed by the puzzle .
they were at the nursery in UNK to promote a tory pledge to double free childcare for 25 children aged
three and four .
the pair were at the nursery in UNK to promote a tory pledge to double free childcare for children aged
three and four .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands .

prime minister tried out what could be a new election slogan .

but they hit trouble after it proved to be more difﬁcult than expected .

Figure 13: The baseline model appropriately replaces stumped with novel word mystiﬁed. However, the
reference summary chooses ﬂummoxed (also novel) so the choice of mystiﬁed is not rewarded by the
ROUGE metric. The baseline model also incorrectly substitutes 600,000 for 25. In the ﬁnal model’s
output we observe that the generation probability is largest at the beginning of sentences (especially the
ﬁrst verb) and on periods.

Article (truncated):
muhammadu buhari

lagos , nigeria ( cnn ) a day after winning nigeria ’s presidency ,

that he plans to aggressively ﬁght
corruption that has long plagued nigeria and go after the root of the nation ’s unrest . buhari

told cnn ’s christiane amanpour

said he ’ll “ rapidly give attention ” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria

, where the terrorist group boko haram operates . by cooperating with neighboring nations

chad , cameroon and niger , he said his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart

criminals and others contributing to nigeria ’s instability . for the ﬁrst time in nigeria ’s history
, the opposition defeated the ruling party in democratic elections . buhari defeated incumbent

goodluck jonathan by about 2 million votes , according to nigeria ’s independent national

electoral commission . the win comes after a long history of military rule , coups and botched

attempts at democracy in africa ’s most populous nation .

Reference Summary:
muhammadu buhari tells cnn ’s christiane amanpour that he will ﬁght corruption in nigeria .
nigeria is the most populous country in africa and is grappling with violent boko haram extremists .
nigeria is also africa ’s biggest economy , but up to 70 % of nigerians live on less than a dollar a day .

Baseline:
UNK UNK says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to destabilize nigeria ’s economy .
UNK says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals and other nigerians .
he says the country has long nigeria and nigeria ’s economy .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption in the northeast part of nigeria .
he says he ’ll “ rapidly give attention ” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria .
he says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria

.

he says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals .

the win comes after a long history of military rule , coups and botched attempts at democracy

in africa ’s most populous nation .

Figure 14: The baseline model incorrectly changes thwart criminals and others contributing to nigeria’s
instability to destabilize nigeria’s economy – which has a mostly opposite meaning. It also produces a
nonsensical sentence. Note that our ﬁnal model produces the novel word says to paraphrase told cnn ‘s
christiane amanpour.

Article: cairo ( cnn ) at least 12 people were killed sunday , and more injured , in separate

attacks on a police station , a checkpoint and along a highway in egypt ’s northern sinai

,

authorities said . six people , including one civilian , were killed when a car bomb exploded
near the police station in al-arish , capital of north sinai , health ministry spokesman hossam
abdel-ghafar told ahram online . he said 40 people were injured . ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis

afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack , which came hours after another operation that
the group also claimed . in that earlier attack , a ﬁrst lieutenant , a sergeant and four conscripts
were killed when their armored vehicle was attacked on the highway from al-arish to sheikh
zuweid in northern sinai , the military said . two other soldiers were injured and taken to a
military hospital . ansar beit al-maqdis has claimed many attacks against the army and police

in sinai . a third attack sunday on a checkpoint in rafah left three security personnel injured

, after unknown assailants opened ﬁre at them , according to state media . the attacks come

as the military announced a reshufﬂe of several senior military positions , state media reported

. among those being replaced are the generals in charge of military intelligence and egypt ’s

second ﬁeld army , which is spearheading the battle against the insurgents in the northern sinai

. egypt ’s army has been ﬁghting a decade-long militant islamist insurgency , which has spiked

since the ouster of muslim brotherhood president mohamed morsy in the summer of 2013 .

hundreds of police and soldiers , as well as civilians , have been killed in militant attacks in

the past months . ian lee reported from cairo . anas hamdan reported from atlanta .

Reference Summary:
six people , including one civilian , are killed when a car bomb explodes near a police station .
six others are killed when their armored vehicle is attacked on a highway in northern sinai .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claims responsibility .

Baseline:
he says the attacks come after another operation that killed 12 .
the attacks come as military announced a u.n. peacekeeping force in northern sinai .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .
the attacks come as the military announced a reshufﬂe of several senior military positions .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
six people ,

including one civilian , were killed when a car bomb explodes near the police

station .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .

egypt ’s army has been ﬁghting a decade-long militant islamist insurgency .

Figure 15: The baseline model fabricates a completely false detail about a u.n. peacekeeping force that
is not mentioned in the article. This is most likely inspired by a connection between U.N. peacekeeping
forces and northern sinai in the training data. The pointer-generator model is more accurate, correctly
reporting the reshufﬂe of several senior military positions.

Get To The Point: Summarization with Pointer-Generator Networks

Abigail See
Stanford University
abisee@stanford.edu

Peter J. Liu
Google Brain
peterjliu@google.com

Christopher D. Manning
Stanford University
manning@stanford.edu

7
1
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
2
 
 
]
L
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
2
v
8
6
3
4
0
.
4
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Neural sequence-to-sequence models have
provided a viable new approach for ab-
stractive text summarization (meaning
they are not restricted to simply selecting
and rearranging passages from the origi-
nal text). However, these models have two
shortcomings: they are liable to reproduce
factual details inaccurately, and they tend
to repeat themselves. In this work we pro-
pose a novel architecture that augments the
standard sequence-to-sequence attentional
model in two orthogonal ways.
First,
we use a hybrid pointer-generator network
that can copy words from the source text
via pointing, which aids accurate repro-
duction of information, while retaining the
ability to produce novel words through the
generator. Second, we use coverage to
keep track of what has been summarized,
which discourages repetition. We apply
our model to the CNN / Daily Mail sum-
marization task, outperforming the current
abstractive state-of-the-art by at least 2
ROUGE points.

Original Text (truncated): lagos, nigeria (cnn) a day after winning nige-
ria’s presidency, muhammadu buhari told cnn’s christiane amanpour that
he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria
and go after the root of the nation’s unrest. buhari said he’ll “rapidly give
attention” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria, where the ter-
rorist group boko haram operates. by cooperating with neighboring nations
chad, cameroon and niger, he said his administration is conﬁdent it will
be able to thwart criminals and others contributing to nigeria’s instability.
for the ﬁrst time in nigeria’s history, the opposition defeated the ruling party
in democratic elections. buhari defeated incumbent goodluck jonathan by
about 2 million votes, according to nigeria’s independent national electoral
commission. the win comes after a long history of military rule, coups
and botched attempts at democracy in africa’s most populous nation.

Baseline Seq2Seq + Attention: UNK UNK says his administration is conﬁ-
dent it will be able to destabilize nigeria’s economy. UNK says his admin-
istration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals and other nigerians.
he says the country has long nigeria and nigeria’s economy.

Pointer-Gen: muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght cor-
ruption in the northeast part of nigeria. he says he’ll “rapidly give at-
tention” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria. he says his
administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals.

Pointer-Gen + Coverage: muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively
ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria. he says his administration is
conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals. the win comes after a long his-
tory of military rule, coups and botched attempts at democracy in africa’s
most populous nation.

Figure 1: Comparison of output of 3 abstrac-
tive summarization models on a news article. The
baseline model makes factual errors, a nonsen-
sical sentence and struggles with OOV words
muhammadu buhari. The pointer-generator model
is accurate but repeats itself. Coverage eliminates
repetition. The ﬁnal summary is composed from
several fragments.

1

Introduction

Summarization is the task of condensing a piece of
text to a shorter version that contains the main in-
formation from the original. There are two broad
approaches to summarization: extractive and ab-
stractive. Extractive methods assemble summaries
exclusively from passages (usually whole sen-
tences) taken directly from the source text, while
abstractive methods may generate novel words
and phrases not featured in the source text – as
a human-written abstract usually does. The ex-
tractive approach is easier, because copying large

chunks of text from the source document ensures
baseline levels of grammaticality and accuracy.
On the other hand, sophisticated abilities that are
crucial to high-quality summarization, such as
paraphrasing, generalization, or the incorporation
of real-world knowledge, are possible only in an
abstractive framework (see Figure 5).

Due to the difﬁculty of abstractive summariza-
tion, the great majority of past work has been ex-
tractive (Kupiec et al., 1995; Paice, 1990; Sag-
gion and Poibeau, 2013). However, the recent suc-
cess of sequence-to-sequence models (Sutskever

Figure 2: Baseline sequence-to-sequence model with attention. The model may attend to relevant words
in the source text to generate novel words, e.g., to produce the novel word beat in the abstractive summary
Germany beat Argentina 2-0 the model may attend to the words victorious and win in the source text.

et al., 2014), in which recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) both read and freely generate text, has
made abstractive summarization viable (Chopra
et al., 2016; Nallapati et al., 2016; Rush et al.,
2015; Zeng et al., 2016). Though these systems
are promising, they exhibit undesirable behavior
such as inaccurately reproducing factual details,
an inability to deal with out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
words, and repeating themselves (see Figure 1).

In this paper we present an architecture that
addresses these three issues in the context of
multi-sentence summaries. While most recent ab-
stractive work has focused on headline genera-
tion tasks (reducing one or two sentences to a
single headline), we believe that longer-text sum-
marization is both more challenging (requiring
higher levels of abstraction while avoiding repe-
tition) and ultimately more useful. Therefore we
apply our model to the recently-introduced CNN/
Daily Mail dataset (Hermann et al., 2015; Nallap-
ati et al., 2016), which contains news articles (39
sentences on average) paired with multi-sentence
summaries, and show that we outperform the state-
of-the-art abstractive system by at least 2 ROUGE
points.

Our hybrid pointer-generator network facili-
tates copying words from the source text via point-
ing (Vinyals et al., 2015), which improves accu-
racy and handling of OOV words, while retaining
the ability to generate new words. The network,
which can be viewed as a balance between extrac-
tive and abstractive approaches, is similar to Gu
et al.’s (2016) CopyNet and Miao and Blunsom’s
(2016) Forced-Attention Sentence Compression,

that were applied to short-text summarization. We
propose a novel variant of the coverage vector (Tu
et al., 2016) from Neural Machine Translation,
which we use to track and control coverage of the
source document. We show that coverage is re-
markably effective for eliminating repetition.

2 Our Models

In this section we describe (1) our baseline
(2) our pointer-
sequence-to-sequence model,
generator model, and (3) our coverage mechanism
that can be added to either of the ﬁrst two models.
The code for our models is available online.1

2.1 Sequence-to-sequence attentional model

Our baseline model is similar to that of Nallapati
et al. (2016), and is depicted in Figure 2. The to-
kens of the article wi are fed one-by-one into the
encoder (a single-layer bidirectional LSTM), pro-
ducing a sequence of encoder hidden states hi. On
each step t, the decoder (a single-layer unidirec-
tional LSTM) receives the word embedding of the
previous word (while training, this is the previous
word of the reference summary; at test time it is
the previous word emitted by the decoder), and
has decoder state st. The attention distribution at
is calculated as in Bahdanau et al. (2015):

et
i = vT tanh(Whhi +Wsst + battn)
at = softmax(et)

(1)

(2)

where v, Wh, Ws and battn are learnable parame-
ters. The attention distribution can be viewed as

1www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

Figure 3: Pointer-generator model. For each decoder timestep a generation probability pgen ∈ [0, 1] is
calculated, which weights the probability of generating words from the vocabulary, versus copying words
from the source text. The vocabulary distribution and the attention distribution are weighted and summed
to obtain the ﬁnal distribution, from which we make our prediction. Note that out-of-vocabulary article
words such as 2-0 are included in the ﬁnal distribution. Best viewed in color.

a probability distribution over the source words,
that tells the decoder where to look to produce the
next word. Next, the attention distribution is used
to produce a weighted sum of the encoder hidden
states, known as the context vector h∗
t :
t = ∑i at
h∗
The context vector, which can be seen as a ﬁxed-
size representation of what has been read from the
source for this step, is concatenated with the de-
coder state st and fed through two linear layers to
produce the vocabulary distribution Pvocab:
t ] + b) + b(cid:48))

Pvocab = softmax(V (cid:48)(V [st, h∗

ihi

(3)

(4)

where V , V (cid:48), b and b(cid:48) are learnable parameters.
Pvocab is a probability distribution over all words
in the vocabulary, and provides us with our ﬁnal
distribution from which to predict words w:

P(w) = Pvocab(w)

During training, the loss for timestep t is the neg-
ative log likelihood of the target word w∗
t for that
timestep:

losst = − log P(w∗
t )
and the overall loss for the whole sequence is:

(5)

(6)

(7)

loss =

1

T ∑T

t=0 losst

2.2 Pointer-generator network

Our pointer-generator network is a hybrid between
our baseline and a pointer network (Vinyals et al.,
2015), as it allows both copying words via point-
ing, and generating words from a ﬁxed vocabulary.
In the pointer-generator model (depicted in Figure
3) the attention distribution at and context vector
h∗
t are calculated as in section 2.1. In addition, the
generation probability pgen ∈ [0, 1] for timestep t is
calculated from the context vector h∗
t , the decoder
state st and the decoder input xt:

(8)

h∗h∗

s st + wT

x xt + bptr)

pgen = σ (wT

t + wT
where vectors wh∗, ws, wx and scalar bptr are learn-
able parameters and σ is the sigmoid function.
Next, pgen is used as a soft switch to choose be-
tween generating a word from the vocabulary by
sampling from Pvocab, or copying a word from the
input sequence by sampling from the attention dis-
tribution at. For each document let the extended
vocabulary denote the union of the vocabulary,
and all words appearing in the source document.
We obtain the following probability distribution
over the extended vocabulary:
P(w) = pgenPvocab(w) + (1 − pgen)∑i:wi=w at
Note that if w is an out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
word, then Pvocab(w) is zero; similarly if w does

i (9)

not appear in the source document, then ∑i:wi=w at
i
is zero. The ability to produce OOV words is
one of the primary advantages of pointer-generator
models; by contrast models such as our baseline
are restricted to their pre-set vocabulary.

The loss function is as described in equations
(6) and (7), but with respect to our modiﬁed prob-
ability distribution P(w) given in equation (9).

Our loss function is more ﬂexible: because sum-
marization should not require uniform coverage,
we only penalize the overlap between each atten-
tion distribution and the coverage so far – prevent-
ing repeated attention. Finally, the coverage loss,
reweighted by some hyperparameter λ , is added to
the primary loss function to yield a new composite
loss function:

2.3 Coverage mechanism

Repetition is a common problem for sequence-
to-sequence models (Tu et al., 2016; Mi et al.,
2016; Sankaran et al., 2016; Suzuki and Nagata,
2016), and is especially pronounced when gener-
ating multi-sentence text (see Figure 1). We adapt
the coverage model of Tu et al. (2016) to solve the
problem. In our coverage model, we maintain a
coverage vector ct, which is the sum of attention
distributions over all previous decoder timesteps:

t(cid:48)=0

at(cid:48)

(10)

ct = ∑t−1
Intuitively, ct is a (unnormalized) distribution over
the source document words that represents the de-
gree of coverage that those words have received
from the attention mechanism so far. Note that c0
is a zero vector, because on the ﬁrst timestep, none
of the source document has been covered.

The coverage vector is used as extra input to the

attention mechanism, changing equation (1) to:

i = vT tanh(Whhi +Wsst + wcct
et

i + battn)

(11)

where wc is a learnable parameter vector of same
length as v. This ensures that the attention mecha-
nism’s current decision (choosing where to attend
next) is informed by a reminder of its previous
decisions (summarized in ct). This should make
it easier for the attention mechanism to avoid re-
peatedly attending to the same locations, and thus
avoid generating repetitive text.

We ﬁnd it necessary (see section 5) to addition-
ally deﬁne a coverage loss to penalize repeatedly
attending to the same locations:

covlosst = ∑i min(at

i, ct
i)

(12)

Note that the coverage loss is bounded; in particu-
lar covlosst ≤ ∑i at
i = 1. Equation (12) differs from
the coverage loss used in Machine Translation. In
MT, we assume that there should be a roughly one-
to-one translation ratio; accordingly the ﬁnal cov-
erage vector is penalized if it is more or less than 1.

losst = − log P(w∗

t ) + λ ∑i min(at

i, ct
i)

(13)

3 Related Work

Neural abstractive summarization. Rush et al.
(2015) were the ﬁrst to apply modern neural net-
works to abstractive text summarization, achiev-
ing state-of-the-art performance on DUC-2004
and Gigaword, two sentence-level summarization
datasets. Their approach, which is centered on the
attention mechanism, has been augmented with re-
current decoders (Chopra et al., 2016), Abstract
Meaning Representations (Takase et al., 2016), hi-
erarchical networks (Nallapati et al., 2016), vari-
ational autoencoders (Miao and Blunsom, 2016),
and direct optimization of the performance metric
(Ranzato et al., 2016), further improving perfor-
mance on those datasets.

However, large-scale datasets for summariza-
tion of longer text are rare. Nallapati et al. (2016)
adapted the DeepMind question-answering dataset
(Hermann et al., 2015) for summarization, result-
ing in the CNN/Daily Mail dataset, and provided
the ﬁrst abstractive baselines. The same authors
then published a neural extractive approach (Nal-
lapati et al., 2017), which uses hierarchical RNNs
to select sentences, and found that it signiﬁcantly
outperformed their abstractive result with respect
to the ROUGE metric. To our knowledge, these
are the only two published results on the full data-
set.

Prior to modern neural methods, abstractive
summarization received less attention than extrac-
tive summarization, but Jing (2000) explored cut-
ting unimportant parts of sentences to create sum-
maries, and Cheung and Penn (2014) explore sen-
tence fusion using dependency trees.

Pointer-generator networks. The pointer net-
work (Vinyals et al., 2015) is a sequence-to-
sequence model that uses the soft attention dis-
tribution of Bahdanau et al.
(2015) to produce
an output sequence consisting of elements from

the input sequence. The pointer network has been
used to create hybrid approaches for NMT (Gul-
cehre et al., 2016), language modeling (Merity
et al., 2016), and summarization (Gu et al., 2016;
Gulcehre et al., 2016; Miao and Blunsom, 2016;
Nallapati et al., 2016; Zeng et al., 2016).

Our approach is close to the Forced-Attention
Sentence Compression model of Miao and Blun-
som (2016) and the CopyNet model of Gu et al.
(2016), with some small differences: (i) We cal-
culate an explicit switch probability pgen, whereas
Gu et al. induce competition through a shared soft-
max function. (ii) We recycle the attention distri-
bution to serve as the copy distribution, but Gu et
al. use two separate distributions.
(iii) When a
word appears multiple times in the source text, we
sum probability mass from all corresponding parts
of the attention distribution, whereas Miao and
Blunsom do not. Our reasoning is that (i) calcu-
lating an explicit pgen usefully enables us to raise
or lower the probability of all generated words or
all copy words at once, rather than individually,
(ii) the two distributions serve such similar pur-
poses that we ﬁnd our simpler approach sufﬁces,
and (iii) we observe that the pointer mechanism
often copies a word while attending to multiple oc-
currences of it in the source text.

Our approach is considerably different from
that of Gulcehre et al. (2016) and Nallapati et al.
(2016). Those works train their pointer compo-
nents to activate only for out-of-vocabulary words
or named entities (whereas we allow our model to
freely learn when to use the pointer), and they do
not mix the probabilities from the copy distribu-
tion and the vocabulary distribution. We believe
the mixture approach described here is better for
abstractive summarization – in section 6 we show
that the copy mechanism is vital for accurately
reproducing rare but in-vocabulary words, and in
section 7.2 we observe that the mixture model en-
ables the language model and copy mechanism to
work together to perform abstractive copying.

Coverage. Originating from Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (Koehn, 2009), coverage was
adapted for NMT by Tu et al. (2016) and Mi et al.
(2016), who both use a GRU to update the cov-
erage vector each step. We ﬁnd that a simpler
approach – summing the attention distributions to
obtain the coverage vector – sufﬁces. In this re-
spect our approach is similar to Xu et al. (2015),
who apply a coverage-like method to image cap-

tioning, and Chen et al. (2016), who also incorpo-
rate a coverage mechanism (which they call ‘dis-
traction’) as described in equation (11) into neural
summarization of longer text.

Temporal attention is a related technique that
has been applied to NMT (Sankaran et al., 2016)
and summarization (Nallapati et al., 2016).
In
this approach, each attention distribution is di-
vided by the sum of the previous, which effec-
tively dampens repeated attention. We tried this
method but found it too destructive, distorting the
signal from the attention mechanism and reducing
performance. We hypothesize that an early inter-
vention method such as coverage is preferable to
a post hoc method such as temporal attention – it
is better to inform the attention mechanism to help
it make better decisions, than to override its de-
cisions altogether. This theory is supported by the
large boost that coverage gives our ROUGE scores
(see Table 1), compared to the smaller boost given
by temporal attention for the same task (Nallapati
et al., 2016).

4 Dataset

We use the CNN/Daily Mail dataset (Hermann
et al., 2015; Nallapati et al., 2016), which con-
tains online news articles (781 tokens on average)
paired with multi-sentence summaries (3.75 sen-
tences or 56 tokens on average). We used scripts
supplied by Nallapati et al. (2016) to obtain the
same version of the the data, which has 287,226
training pairs, 13,368 validation pairs and 11,490
test pairs. Both the dataset’s published results
(Nallapati et al., 2016, 2017) use the anonymized
version of the data, which has been pre-processed
to replace each named entity, e.g., The United Na-
tions, with its own unique identiﬁer for the exam-
ple pair, e.g., @entity5. By contrast, we operate
directly on the original text (or non-anonymized
version of the data),2 which we believe is the fa-
vorable problem to solve because it requires no
pre-processing.

5 Experiments

all

experiments,

our model has 256-
For
dimensional hidden states and 128-dimensional
word embeddings. For the pointer-generator mod-
els, we use a vocabulary of 50k words for both
source and target – note that due to the pointer net-
work’s ability to handle OOV words, we can use

2at www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

METEOR
exact match + stem/syn/para

abstractive model (Nallapati et al., 2016)*
seq-to-seq + attn baseline (150k vocab)
seq-to-seq + attn baseline (50k vocab)
pointer-generator
pointer-generator + coverage
lead-3 baseline (ours)
lead-3 baseline (Nallapati et al., 2017)*
extractive model (Nallapati et al., 2017)*

ROUGE
2
13.30
11.17
11.81
15.66
17.28
17.70
15.7
16.2

L
32.65
28.08
28.83
33.42
36.38
36.57
35.5
35.3

1
35.46
30.49
31.33
36.44
39.53
40.34
39.2
39.6

-
11.65
12.03
15.35
17.32
20.48
-
-

-
12.86
13.20
16.65
18.72
22.21
-
-

Table 1: ROUGE F1 and METEOR scores on the test set. Models and baselines in the top half are
abstractive, while those in the bottom half are extractive. Those marked with * were trained and evaluated
on the anonymized dataset, and so are not strictly comparable to our results on the original text. All our
ROUGE scores have a 95% conﬁdence interval of at most ±0.25 as reported by the ofﬁcial ROUGE
script. The METEOR improvement from the 50k baseline to the pointer-generator model, and from the
pointer-generator to the pointer-generator+coverage model, were both found to be statistically signiﬁcant
using an approximate randomization test with p < 0.01.

a smaller vocabulary size than Nallapati et al.’s
(2016) 150k source and 60k target vocabularies.
For the baseline model, we also try a larger vocab-
ulary size of 150k.

Note that the pointer and the coverage mecha-
nism introduce very few additional parameters to
the network: for the models with vocabulary size
50k, the baseline model has 21,499,600 parame-
ters, the pointer-generator adds 1153 extra param-
eters (wh∗, ws, wx and bptr in equation 8), and cov-
erage adds 512 extra parameters (wc in equation
11).

Unlike Nallapati et al. (2016), we do not pre-
train the word embeddings – they are learned
from scratch during training. We train using Ada-
grad (Duchi et al., 2011) with learning rate 0.15
and an initial accumulator value of 0.1.
(This
was found to work best of Stochastic Gradient
Descent, Adadelta, Momentum, Adam and RM-
SProp). We use gradient clipping with a maximum
gradient norm of 2, but do not use any form of reg-
ularization. We use loss on the validation set to
implement early stopping.

During training and at test time we truncate the
article to 400 tokens and limit the length of the
summary to 100 tokens for training and 120 to-
kens at test time.3 This is done to expedite train-
ing and testing, but we also found that truncating
the article can raise the performance of the model

3The upper limit of 120 is mostly invisible:

the beam
search algorithm is self-stopping and almost never reaches
the 120th step.

(see section 7.1 for more details). For training,
we found it efﬁcient to start with highly-truncated
sequences, then raise the maximum length once
converged. We train on a single Tesla K40m GPU
with a batch size of 16. At test time our summaries
are produced using beam search with beam size 4.

We trained both our baseline models for about
600,000 iterations (33 epochs) – this is similar
to the 35 epochs required by Nallapati et al.’s
(2016) best model. Training took 4 days and 14
hours for the 50k vocabulary model, and 8 days 21
hours for the 150k vocabulary model. We found
the pointer-generator model quicker to train, re-
quiring less than 230,000 training iterations (12.8
In par-
epochs); a total of 3 days and 4 hours.
ticular, the pointer-generator model makes much
quicker progress in the early phases of training.
To obtain our ﬁnal coverage model, we added the
coverage mechanism with coverage loss weighted
to λ = 1 (as described in equation 13), and trained
for a further 3000 iterations (about 2 hours).
In
this time the coverage loss converged to about 0.2,
down from an initial value of about 0.5. We also
tried a more aggressive value of λ = 2; this re-
duced coverage loss but increased the primary loss
function, thus we did not use it.

We tried training the coverage model without
the loss function, hoping that the attention mech-
anism may learn by itself not to attend repeatedly
to the same locations, but we found this to be inef-
fective, with no discernible reduction in repetition.
We also tried training with coverage from the ﬁrst

iteration rather than as a separate training phase,
but found that in the early phase of training, the
coverage objective interfered with the main objec-
tive, reducing overall performance.

6 Results

6.1 Preliminaries

Our results are given in Table 1. We evalu-
ate our models with the standard ROUGE metric
(Lin, 2004b), reporting the F1 scores for ROUGE-
1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L (which respectively
measure the word-overlap, bigram-overlap, and
longest common sequence between the reference
summary and the summary to be evaluated). We
obtain our ROUGE scores using the pyrouge
package.4 We also evaluate with the METEOR
metric (Denkowski and Lavie, 2014), both in ex-
act match mode (rewarding only exact matches
between words) and full mode (which addition-
ally rewards matching stems, synonyms and para-
phrases).5

In addition to our own models, we also report
the lead-3 baseline (which uses the ﬁrst three sen-
tences of the article as a summary), and compare
to the only existing abstractive (Nallapati et al.,
2016) and extractive (Nallapati et al., 2017) mod-
els on the full dataset. The output of our models is
available online.6

Given that we generate plain-text summaries but
Nallapati et al. (2016; 2017) generate anonymized
summaries (see Section 4), our ROUGE scores
are not strictly comparable. There is evidence
to suggest that the original-text dataset may re-
sult in higher ROUGE scores in general than the
anonymized dataset – the lead-3 baseline is higher
on the former than the latter. One possible expla-
nation is that multi-word named entities lead to
a higher rate of n-gram overlap. Unfortunately,
ROUGE is the only available means of compar-
ison with Nallapati et al.’s work. Nevertheless,
given that the disparity in the lead-3 scores is
(+1.1 ROUGE-1, +2.0 ROUGE-2, +1.1 ROUGE-
L) points respectively, and our best model scores
exceed Nallapati et al. (2016) by (+4.07 ROUGE-
1, +3.98 ROUGE-2, +3.73 ROUGE-L) points, we
may estimate that we outperform the only previous
abstractive system by at least 2 ROUGE points all-
round.

4pypi.python.org/pypi/pyrouge/0.1.3
5www.cs.cmu.edu/~alavie/METEOR
6www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

30

20

10

s
e
t
a
c
i
l
p
u
d

e
r
a

t
a
h
t

%

0
1 - g r a

m s

m s

2 - g r a

m s

3 - g r a

4 - g r a

m s

n t e

s e

e s

c

n

pointer-generator, no coverage
pointer-generator + coverage
reference summaries

Figure 4: Coverage eliminates undesirable repe-
tition. Summaries from our non-coverage model
contain many duplicated n-grams while our cover-
age model produces a similar number as the ref-
erence summaries.

6.2 Observations

We ﬁnd that both our baseline models perform
poorly with respect to ROUGE and METEOR, and
in fact the larger vocabulary size (150k) does not
seem to help. Even the better-performing baseline
(with 50k vocabulary) produces summaries with
several common problems. Factual details are fre-
quently reproduced incorrectly, often replacing an
uncommon (but in-vocabulary) word with a more-
common alternative. For example in Figure 1,
the baseline model appears to struggle with the
rare word thwart, producing destabilize instead,
which leads to the fabricated phrase destabilize
nigeria’s economy. Even more catastrophically,
the summaries sometimes devolve into repetitive
nonsense, such as the third sentence produced by
the baseline model in Figure 1.
In addition, the
baseline model can’t reproduce out-of-vocabulary
words (such as muhammadu buhari in Figure 1).
Further examples of all these problems are pro-
vided in the supplementary material.

Our pointer-generator model achieves much
better ROUGE and METEOR scores than the
baseline, despite many fewer training epochs. The
difference in the summaries is also marked: out-
of-vocabulary words are handled easily, factual
details are almost always copied correctly, and
there are no fabrications (see Figure 1). However,
repetition is still very common.

Our pointer-generator model with coverage im-
proves the ROUGE and METEOR scores further,
convincingly surpassing the best abstractive model

Article: smugglers lure arab and african migrants by offer-
ing discounts to get onto overcrowded ships if people bring
more potential passengers, a cnn investigation has revealed.
(...)
Summary: cnn investigation uncovers the business inside
a human smuggling ring.

Article: eyewitness video showing white north charleston
police ofﬁcer michael slager shooting to death an unarmed
black man has exposed discrepancies in the reports of the
ﬁrst ofﬁcers on the scene. (...)
Summary: more questions than answers emerge in con-
troversial s.c. police shooting.

Figure 5: Examples of highly abstractive reference
summaries (bold denotes novel words).

of Nallapati et al.
(2016) by several ROUGE
points. Despite the brevity of the coverage train-
ing phase (about 1% of the total training time),
the repetition problem is almost completely elimi-
nated, which can be seen both qualitatively (Figure
1) and quantitatively (Figure 4). However, our best
model does not quite surpass the ROUGE scores
of the lead-3 baseline, nor the current best extrac-
tive model (Nallapati et al., 2017). We discuss this
issue in section 7.1.

7 Discussion

7.1 Comparison with extractive systems

It is clear from Table 1 that extractive systems tend
to achieve higher ROUGE scores than abstractive,
and that the extractive lead-3 baseline is extremely
strong (even the best extractive system beats it by
only a small margin). We offer two possible ex-
planations for these observations.

Firstly, news articles tend to be structured with
the most important information at the start; this
partially explains the strength of the lead-3 base-
line. Indeed, we found that using only the ﬁrst 400
tokens (about 20 sentences) of the article yielded
signiﬁcantly higher ROUGE scores than using the
ﬁrst 800 tokens.

Secondly, the nature of the task and the ROUGE
metric make extractive approaches and the lead-
3 baseline difﬁcult to beat. The choice of con-
tent for the reference summaries is quite subjective
– sometimes the sentences form a self-contained
summary; other times they simply showcase a few
interesting details from the article. Given that the
articles contain 39 sentences on average, there are
many equally valid ways to choose 3 or 4 high-
lights in this style. Abstraction introduces even
more options (choice of phrasing), further decreas-

ing the likelihood of matching the reference sum-
mary. For example, smugglers proﬁt from des-
perate migrants is a valid alternative abstractive
summary for the ﬁrst example in Figure 5, but
it scores 0 ROUGE with respect to the reference
summary. This inﬂexibility of ROUGE is exac-
erbated by only having one reference summary,
which has been shown to lower ROUGE’s relia-
bility compared to multiple reference summaries
(Lin, 2004a).

Due to the subjectivity of the task and thus
the diversity of valid summaries, it seems that
ROUGE rewards safe strategies such as select-
ing the ﬁrst-appearing content, or preserving orig-
inal phrasing. While the reference summaries do
sometimes deviate from these techniques, those
deviations are unpredictable enough that the safer
strategy obtains higher ROUGE scores on average.
This may explain why extractive systems tend to
obtain higher ROUGE scores than abstractive, and
even extractive systems do not signiﬁcantly ex-
ceed the lead-3 baseline.

To explore this issue further, we evaluated our
systems with the METEOR metric, which rewards
not only exact word matches, but also matching
stems, synonyms and paraphrases (from a pre-
deﬁned list). We observe that all our models re-
ceive over 1 METEOR point boost by the inclu-
sion of stem, synonym and paraphrase matching,
indicating that they may be performing some ab-
straction. However, we again observe that the
lead-3 baseline is not surpassed by our models.
It may be that news article style makes the lead-
3 baseline very strong with respect to any metric.
We believe that investigating this issue further is
an important direction for future work.

7.2 How abstractive is our model?

We have shown that our pointer mechanism makes
our abstractive system more reliable, copying fac-
tual details correctly more often. But does the ease
of copying make our system any less abstractive?
Figure 6 shows that our ﬁnal model’s sum-
maries contain a much lower rate of novel n-grams
(i.e., those that don’t appear in the article) than the
reference summaries, indicating a lower degree of
abstraction. Note that the baseline model produces
novel n-grams more frequently – however, this
statistic includes all the incorrectly copied words,
UNK tokens and fabrications alongside the good
instances of abstraction.

l
e
v
o
n

e
r
a

t
a
h
t

%

100
80
60
40
20
0
1 - g r a

m s

m s

2 - g r a

m s

3 - g r a

4 - g r a

m s

n t e

s e

e s

c

n

pointer-generator + coverage
sequence-to-sequence + attention baseline
reference summaries

Figure 6: Although our best model is abstractive,
it does not produce novel n-grams (i.e., n-grams
that don’t appear in the source text) as often as
the reference summaries. The baseline model
produces more novel n-grams, but many of these
are erroneous (see section 7.2).

Article: andy murray (...) is into the semi-ﬁnals of the mi-
ami open , but not before getting a scare from 21 year-old
austrian dominic thiem, who pushed him to 4-4 in the sec-
ond set before going down 3-6 6-4, 6-1 in an hour and three
quarters. (...)
Summary: andy murray defeated dominic thiem 3-6 6-4,
6-1 in an hour and three quarters.

Article: (...) wayne rooney smashes home during manch-
ester united ’s 3-1 win over aston villa on saturday. (...)
Summary: manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old
trafford on saturday.

Figure 7: Examples of abstractive summaries pro-
duced by our model (bold denotes novel words).

In particular, Figure 6 shows that our ﬁnal
model copies whole article sentences 35% of the
time; by comparison the reference summaries do
so only 1.3% of the time. This is a main area for
improvement, as we would like our model to move
beyond simple sentence extraction. However, we
observe that the other 65% encompasses a range of
abstractive techniques. Article sentences are trun-
cated to form grammatically-correct shorter ver-
sions, and new sentences are composed by stitch-
ing together fragments. Unnecessary interjections,
clauses and parenthesized phrases are sometimes
omitted from copied passages. Some of these abil-
ities are demonstrated in Figure 1, and the supple-
mentary material contains more examples.

Figure 7 shows two examples of more impres-
sive abstraction – both with similar structure. The
dataset contains many sports stories whose sum-
maries follow the X beat Y (cid:104)score(cid:105) on (cid:104)day(cid:105) tem-

plate, which may explain why our model is most
conﬁdently abstractive on these examples. In gen-
eral however, our model does not routinely pro-
duce summaries like those in Figure 7, and is not
close to producing summaries like in Figure 5.

The value of the generation probability pgen
also gives a measure of the abstractiveness of our
model. During training, pgen starts with a value
of about 0.30 then increases, converging to about
0.53 by the end of training. This indicates that
the model ﬁrst learns to mostly copy, then learns
to generate about half the time. However at test
time, pgen is heavily skewed towards copying, with
a mean value of 0.17. The disparity is likely
due to the fact that during training, the model re-
ceives word-by-word supervision in the form of
the reference summary, but at test time it does
not. Nonetheless, the generator module is use-
ful even when the model is copying. We ﬁnd
that pgen is highest at times of uncertainty such
as the beginning of sentences, the join between
stitched-together fragments, and when producing
periods that truncate a copied sentence. Our mix-
ture model allows the network to copy while si-
multaneously consulting the language model – en-
abling operations like stitching and truncation to
In any case,
be performed with grammaticality.
encouraging the pointer-generator model to write
more abstractively, while retaining the accuracy
advantages of the pointer module, is an exciting
direction for future work.

8 Conclusion

In this work we presented a hybrid pointer-
generator architecture with coverage, and showed
that it reduces inaccuracies and repetition. We ap-
plied our model to a new and challenging long-
text dataset, and signiﬁcantly outperformed the
abstractive state-of-the-art result. Our model ex-
hibits many abstractive abilities, but attaining
higher levels of abstraction remains an open re-
search question.

9 Acknowledgment

We thank the ACL reviewers for their helpful com-
ments. This work was begun while the ﬁrst author
was an intern at Google Brain and continued at
Stanford. Stanford University gratefully acknowl-
edges the support of the DARPA DEFT Program
AFRL contract no. FA8750-13-2-0040. Any opin-
ions in this material are those of the authors alone.

References

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.

Qian Chen, Xiaodan Zhu, Zhenhua Ling, Si Wei, and
Hui Jiang. 2016. Distraction-based neural networks
In International Joint
for modeling documents.
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

Jackie Chi Kit Cheung and Gerald Penn. 2014. Unsu-
pervised sentence enhancement for automatic sum-
marization. In Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Alexander M Rush.
2016. Abstractive sentence summarization with at-
In North Amer-
tentive recurrent neural networks.
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2014. Meteor
universal: Language speciﬁc translation evaluation
In EACL 2014 Workshop
for any target language.
on Statistical Machine Translation.

John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. 2011.
Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning
Journal of Machine
and stochastic optimization.
Learning Research 12:2121–2159.

Jiatao Gu, Zhengdong Lu, Hang Li, and Victor OK
Incorporating copying mechanism in
In Association for

Li. 2016.
sequence-to-sequence learning.
Computational Linguistics.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004b. Rouge: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. In Text summariza-
tion branches out: ACL workshop.

Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and
Pointer sentinel mixture
Richard Socher. 2016.
In NIPS 2016 Workshop on Multi-class
models.
and Multi-label Learning in Extremely Large Label
Spaces.

Haitao Mi, Baskaran Sankaran, Zhiguo Wang, and Abe
Ittycheriah. 2016. Coverage embedding models for
neural machine translation. In Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing.

Yishu Miao and Phil Blunsom. 2016. Language as a
latent variable: Discrete generative models for sen-
tence compression. In Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing.

Ramesh Nallapati, Feifei Zhai, and Bowen Zhou. 2017.
SummaRuNNer: A recurrent neural network based
sequence model for extractive summarization of
documents. In Association for the Advancement of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Cicero dos Santos,
C¸ aglar Gulc¸ehre, and Bing Xiang. 2016. Abstrac-
tive text summarization using sequence-to-sequence
RNNs and beyond. In Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning.

Chris D Paice. 1990. Constructing literature abstracts
by computer: techniques and prospects. Information
Processing & Management 26(1):171–186.

Caglar Gulcehre, Sungjin Ahn, Ramesh Nallapati,
Bowen Zhou, and Yoshua Bengio. 2016. Pointing
In Association for Computa-
the unknown words.
tional Linguistics.

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli,
and Wojciech Zaremba. 2016. Sequence level train-
ing with recurrent neural networks. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.

Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward
Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Su-
leyman, and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching ma-
chines to read and comprehend. In Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems.

Hongyan Jing. 2000. Sentence reduction for automatic
In Applied natural language

text summarization.
processing.

Philipp Koehn. 2009. Statistical machine translation.

Cambridge University Press.

Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen, and Francine Chen. 1995.
A trainable document summarizer. In International
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004a.

Looking for a few good
metrics: Automatic summarization evaluation-how
In NACSIS/NII Test
many samples are enough?
Collection for Information Retrieval (NTCIR) Work-
shop.

Alexander M Rush, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston.
2015. A neural attention model for abstractive sen-
tence summarization. In Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing.

Horacio Saggion and Thierry Poibeau. 2013. Auto-
matic text summarization: Past, present and future.
In Multi-source, Multilingual Information Extrac-
tion and Summarization, Springer, pages 3–21.

Baskaran Sankaran, Haitao Mi, Yaser Al-Onaizan, and
Abe Ittycheriah. 2016. Temporal attention model
arXiv preprint
for neural machine translation.
arXiv:1608.02927 .

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Neural Information Processing Systems.

Jun Suzuki and Masaaki Nagata. 2016. RNN-based
encoder-decoder approach with word frequency es-
timation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.00138 .

Sho Takase, Jun Suzuki, Naoaki Okazaki, Tsutomu Hi-
rao, and Masaaki Nagata. 2016. Neural headline
generation on abstract meaning representation.
In
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing.

Zhaopeng Tu, Zhengdong Lu, Yang Liu, Xiaohua Liu,
and Hang Li. 2016. Modeling coverage for neural
In Association for Computa-
machine translation.
tional Linguistics.

Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly.
2015. Pointer networks. In Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems.

Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho,
Aaron C Courville, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Richard S
Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show, attend and
tell: Neural image caption generation with visual
attention. In International Conference on Machine
Learning.

Wenyuan Zeng, Wenjie Luo, Sanja Fidler, and Raquel
Efﬁcient summarization with
arXiv preprint

Urtasun. 2016.
read-again and copy mechanism.
arXiv:1611.03382 .

Supplementary Material

This appendix provides examples from the test set, with side-by-side comparisons of the reference sum-
maries and the summaries produced by our models. In each example:

• italics denote out-of-vocabulary words

• red denotes factual errors in the summaries

• green shading intensity represents the value of the generation probability pgen

• yellow shading intensity represents ﬁnal value of the coverage vector at the end of ﬁnal model’s

summarization process.

Article (truncated): andy murray came close to giving himself some extra preparation time for

his wedding next week before ensuring that he still has unﬁnished tennis business to attend to .

the world no 4 is into the semi-ﬁnals of the miami open , but not before getting a scare from
21 year-old austrian dominic thiem , who pushed him to 4-4 in the second set before going

down 3-6 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters . murray was awaiting the winner from the

last eight match between tomas berdych and argentina ’s juan monaco . prior to this tournament
thiem lost in the second round of a challenger event to soon-to-be new brit aljaz bedene . andy
murray pumps his ﬁrst after defeating dominic thiem to reach the miami open semi ﬁnals .
muray throws his sweatband into the crowd after completing a 3-6 , 6-4 , 6-1 victory in ﬂorida
. murray shakes hands with thiem who he described as a ’ strong guy ’ after the game . and

murray has a fairly simple message for any of his fellow british tennis players who might be

agitated about his imminent arrival into the home ranks : do n’t complain . instead the british no

1 believes his colleagues should use the assimilation of the world number 83 , originally from

slovenia , as motivation to better themselves .

Reference Summary:
british no 1 defeated dominic thiem in miami open quarter ﬁnals .
andy murray celebrated his 500th career win in the previous round .
third seed will play the winner of tomas berdych and juan monaco in the semi ﬁnals of the atp masters
1000 event in key biscayne .

Baseline:
andy murray beat UNK bedene 6-3 , 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters .
british no 1 believes his colleagues should use the maze of the world number 83 , originally from
slovenia , as motivation to better themselves .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
andy murray came close to giving himself some extra preparation for his wedding next week before
getting a scare from 21 year-old austrian dominic thiem .
the world no 4 is into the semi-ﬁnals of the miami open , but not before getting a scare from 21 year-old
austrian dominic thiem .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
andy murray defeated dominic thiem 3-6 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters .

murray was awaiting the winner from the last eight match between tomas berdych and argentina

’s juan monaco .

prior to this tournament thiem lost in the second round of a challenger event to soon-to-be new
brit aljaz bedene .

Figure 8: The baseline model reports the wrong score 6-3, substitutes bedene for thiem and strug-
gles with the uncommon word assimilation. The pointer-network models accurately reproduce the out-
of-vocabulary words thiem and aljaz. Note that the ﬁnal model produces the novel word defeated to
incorporate several fragments into a single sentence.

Article (truncated): munster have signed new zealand international francis saili on a two-year
deal . utility back saili , who made his all blacks debut against argentina in 2013 , will move

to the province later this year after the completion of his 2015 contractual commitments . the
24-year-old currently plays for auckland-based super rugby side the blues and was part of the
new zealand under-20 side that won the junior world championship in italy in 2011 . saili ’s

signature is something of a coup for munster and head coach anthony foley believes he will
be a great addition to their backline . francis saili has signed a two-year deal to join munster

and will link up with them later this year . ’ we are really pleased that francis has committed

his future to the province , ’ foley told munster ’s ofﬁcial website . ’ he is a talented centre
with an impressive skill-set and he possesses the physical attributes to excel

in the northern

hemisphere . ’ i believe he will be a great addition to our backline and we look forward to
welcoming him to munster . ’ saili has been capped twice by new zealand and was part of the

under 20 side that won the junior championship in 2011 .

Reference Summary:
utility back francis saili will join up with munster later this year .
the new zealand international has signed a two-year contract .
saili made his debut for the all blacks against argentina in 2013 .

Baseline:
dutch international francis UNK has signed a two-year deal to join irish UNK super rugby side the
blues .
UNK ’s signature is something of a coup for munster and his head coach anthony foley believes he will
be a great addition to their respective prospects .
UNK has been capped twice by new zealand .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
new zealand international francis saili will move to the province later this year .
utility back saili made his all blacks debut against argentina in 2013 .
utility back saili will move to the province later this year .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
francis saili has signed a two-year deal to join munster later this year .

the 24-year-old was part of

the new zealand under-20 side that won the junior world

championship in italy in 2011 .
saili ’s signature is something of a coup for munster and head coach anthony foley .

Figure 9: The baseline model incorrectly substitutes dutch for new zealand (perhaps reﬂecting the Euro-
pean bias of the dataset), fabricates irish, and struggles with out-of-vocabulary words saili and auckland-
based. Though it is not clear why, the phrase addition to our backline is changed to the nonsensical
addition to their respective prospects. The pointer-generator model ﬁxes these accuracy problems, and
the addition of coverage ﬁxes the repetition problem. Note that the ﬁnal model skips over large passages
of text to produce shorter sentences.

Article (truncated): right from the moment he breezed through the doors at old trafford , louis

van gaal was a man with a plan . the ﬁrst season , he stated , would see him deliver manchester

united back into their rightful place in the champions league . he would restore them to the
premier league top four but loftier aims of silverware would have to wait . his three-year vision

would allow for such thoughts but , ﬁrst things ﬁrst , united needed to be dining from european
football ’s top table again . louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning

man united into champions league . wayne rooney smashes home during manchester united ’s

3-1 win over aston villa on saturday . united ’s win over aston villa took them third , eight

points ahead of ﬁfth-placed liverpool in the table . april 12 manchester city ( h ) . april 18

chelsea ( a ) . april 26 everton ( a ) . may 2 west bromwich albion ( h ) . may 9 crystal

palace ( a ) . may 17 arsenal ( h ) . may 24 hull city ( a ) . one season out of the champions

league was far from ideal , but two seasons would be an absolute disaster and something , he

understood , that would not be tolerated . in november , even that was looking optimistic . a

1-0 defeat to manchester city meant that united had taken just 13 points from their opening 10

matches - it was their worst start to a league campaign since 1986 , when ron atkinson only

lasted until november .

Reference Summary:
man united have an eight-point cushion from ﬁfth-place liverpool .
van gaal looks likely to deliver on his promise of top four ﬁnish .
but the dutchman has a three-year vision mapped out .
next season will have to see united mount sustained challenge for title .
they must also reach the later stages of the champions league .

Baseline:
manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old trafford on saturday .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his UNK aim of returning man united into the premier league top
four .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his UNK aim of returning man united into champions league .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions league.
united ’s win over aston villa took them third , eight points ahead of ﬁfth-placed liverpool in the table .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions league.

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old trafford on saturday .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions

league .

united needed to be dining from european football ’s top table again .

Figure 10: In this example, both our baseline model and ﬁnal model produce a completely abstractive
ﬁrst sentence, using a novel word beat.

Article (truncated): having been on the receiving end of a 6-1 thumping , a defeat like that

could be justiﬁably met with a backlash by angry supporters . watching a 3-1 ﬁrst leg aggregate

advantage turn into a 7-4 deﬁcit come the end of the reverse encounter too could send many
fans apoplectic at

the capitulation of their side . however that does n’t appear the case for

those devoted to porto . porto supporters gave their team a hero ’s welcome following their

6-1 defeat at bayern munich on tuesday . porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many
players to look perplexed by their warm reception . porto boss julen lopetegui ( left ) was

hugged by fans congratulating him on their champions league run . police escorts were needed

to keep the delirious supporters at bay as the porto team bus drove past . the team bus was met

with a cacophony of noise from porto supporters proudly chanting about their club . on their

return from a humiliating champions league quarter-ﬁnal loss at the hands of bayern munich on

tuesday night , the squad were given a heroes reception as they arrived back in portugal . in the

early hours of wednesday morning , fans mobbed the squad congratulating them on their run
in the tournament . star striker jackson martinez and ricardo quaresma were one of many porto

players who looked perplexed as they were hugged by fans before they making their way on to
the team bus - set upon a cacophony of ﬁercely-proud chanting . it was the ﬁrst time that porto

, who had been unbeaten in this season ’s tournament up until tuesday night , had reached the

quarter-ﬁnals of the champions league since the 2008-09 season .

Reference Summary:
bayern munich beat porto 6-1 in their champions league tie on tuesday .
result saw bayern win quarter-ﬁnal encounter 7-4 on aggregate .
it was the ﬁrst-time porto had reached that stage since the 2008-09 season .

Baseline:
porto beat bayern munich 2-0 in the champions league on tuesday night .
porto star james UNK was one of many players involved in the match .
the squad were given a trophy as they arrived back in portugal .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm

porto boss julen lopetegui was hugged by fans congratulating him on their champions league

reception .

run .

however that does n’t appear the case for those devoted to porto .

police escorts were needed to keep the delirious supporters at bay .

Figure 11: The baseline model makes several factual inaccuracies: it claims porto beat bayern munich
not vice versa, the score is changed from 7-4 to 2-0, jackson is changed to james and a heroes reception
is replaced with a trophy. Our ﬁnal model produces sentences that are individually accurate, but they
do not make sense as a whole. Note that the ﬁnal model omits the parenthesized phrase ( left ) from its
second sentence.

Article:
( cnn ) ” it ’s showtime ! ” michael keaton paid homage – ever so slightly – to
his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third turn hosting “ saturday night live ”

this weekend . keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since

he ﬁrst hosted the comedy sketch show in 1982 . “ i had a baby – he ’s 31 . i also have

a new girlfriend – she ’s 28 , ” he said . fans who were hoping for a full-blown revival of

keaton ’s most memorable characters might have been a little disappointed . snl cast members
taran killam and bobby moynihan begged the actor with a song to “ play ” batman and
beetlejuice with them . all they got in response were a couple of one-liners . overall , keaton

’s performance drew high marks from viewers and critics for its “ deadpan ” manner and “
unpredictable weirdness , ” in the words of a.v . club ’s dennis perkins . fans also delighted
in a cameo from “ walking dead ” star norman reedus during weekend update . keaton scored

some laughs from the audience as an ad executive who ’s not very good at his job , a confused

grandfather and a high school teacher who gets asked to the prom in a riff on the romantic
comedy “ she ’s all that . ” other crowd-pleasing spots included a scientology parody music
video and a news conference spooﬁng the ncaa student-athlete debate . the show also poked fun

at cnn with cast member cecily strong playing anchor brooke baldwin . baldwin said on twitter

that she ’s taking it as a “ crazy compliment ” and shared a clip from the skit .

Reference Summary:
michael keaton hosted “ saturday night live ” for the ﬁrst time in 1982 .
in 2015 , his nods to starring roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” are brief .

Baseline:
“ snl ” wins “ saturday night live ” .
keaton acknowledged in his opening “ saturday night live ” .
keaton acknowledged in his opening night ’s “ UNK ” .
the show also pokes fun at cnn with cast member mariah carey .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
“ beetlejuice ” michael keaton paid homage to his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third
turn hosting “ saturday night live ” this weekend .
keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since he ﬁrst hosted the comedy
sketch show in 1982 .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
michael keaton paid homage to his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third turn

hosting “ saturday night live ” .

comedy sketch show in 1982 .

keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since he ﬁrst hosted the

Figure 12: Baseline model replaces cecily strong with mariah carey, and produces generally nonsensical
output. The baseline model may be struggling with the out-of-vocabulary word beetlejuice, or perhaps
the unusual non-news format of the article. Note that the ﬁnal model omits – ever so slightly – from its
ﬁrst sentence.

Article (truncated): they are supposed to be the dream team who can solve the conundrum

of how to win the election . but david cameron and boris johnson were left scratching their

heads today as they struggled with a children ’s jigsaw teaching toddlers about

the seasons

. as the london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands , the prime

minister tried out what could be a new election slogan , telling him : ’ if in doubt , wedge it

in . ’ after being put right by a four-year-old who spotted their errors , the pair had more fun

ﬁnger painting with tory blue paint . david cameron and boris johnson were left stumped by
the puzzle at advantage children ’s day nursery in surbiton , as three-year-old stephanie looked

on . when they tried to put the puzzle back together , they hit trouble after it proved to be

more difﬁcult than expected . the conservative duo made their ﬁrst appearance together on the
campaign trail with a visit to advantage day nursery in surbiton , south west london . they were

supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare for 600,000 children aged three

and four . they sat at a table with joshua and stephanie , both aged three , and four-year-olds

hamish and leo where they broke up a puzzle which depicted the four seasons . when they tried

to put it back together , they hit trouble after it proved to be more difﬁcult than expected .

Reference Summary:
david cameron and boris johnson visit nursery to promote childcare .
duo left ﬂummoxed by jigsaw aimed at teaching children about seasons .
london mayor resorted to brute force to hammer wrong pieces together .
prime minister gave his approval , telling boris : ’ if in doubt , wedge it in ’ .

Baseline:
david cameron and boris johnson were left mystiﬁed by the puzzle .
they were at the nursery in UNK to promote a tory pledge to double free childcare for 25 children aged
three and four .
the pair were at the nursery in UNK to promote a tory pledge to double free childcare for children aged
three and four .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands .

prime minister tried out what could be a new election slogan .

but they hit trouble after it proved to be more difﬁcult than expected .

Figure 13: The baseline model appropriately replaces stumped with novel word mystiﬁed. However, the
reference summary chooses ﬂummoxed (also novel) so the choice of mystiﬁed is not rewarded by the
ROUGE metric. The baseline model also incorrectly substitutes 600,000 for 25. In the ﬁnal model’s
output we observe that the generation probability is largest at the beginning of sentences (especially the
ﬁrst verb) and on periods.

Article (truncated):
muhammadu buhari

lagos , nigeria ( cnn ) a day after winning nigeria ’s presidency ,

that he plans to aggressively ﬁght
corruption that has long plagued nigeria and go after the root of the nation ’s unrest . buhari

told cnn ’s christiane amanpour

said he ’ll “ rapidly give attention ” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria

, where the terrorist group boko haram operates . by cooperating with neighboring nations

chad , cameroon and niger , he said his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart

criminals and others contributing to nigeria ’s instability . for the ﬁrst time in nigeria ’s history
, the opposition defeated the ruling party in democratic elections . buhari defeated incumbent

goodluck jonathan by about 2 million votes , according to nigeria ’s independent national

electoral commission . the win comes after a long history of military rule , coups and botched

attempts at democracy in africa ’s most populous nation .

Reference Summary:
muhammadu buhari tells cnn ’s christiane amanpour that he will ﬁght corruption in nigeria .
nigeria is the most populous country in africa and is grappling with violent boko haram extremists .
nigeria is also africa ’s biggest economy , but up to 70 % of nigerians live on less than a dollar a day .

Baseline:
UNK UNK says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to destabilize nigeria ’s economy .
UNK says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals and other nigerians .
he says the country has long nigeria and nigeria ’s economy .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption in the northeast part of nigeria .
he says he ’ll “ rapidly give attention ” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria .
he says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria

.

he says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals .

the win comes after a long history of military rule , coups and botched attempts at democracy

in africa ’s most populous nation .

Figure 14: The baseline model incorrectly changes thwart criminals and others contributing to nigeria’s
instability to destabilize nigeria’s economy – which has a mostly opposite meaning. It also produces a
nonsensical sentence. Note that our ﬁnal model produces the novel word says to paraphrase told cnn ‘s
christiane amanpour.

Article: cairo ( cnn ) at least 12 people were killed sunday , and more injured , in separate

attacks on a police station , a checkpoint and along a highway in egypt ’s northern sinai

,

authorities said . six people , including one civilian , were killed when a car bomb exploded
near the police station in al-arish , capital of north sinai , health ministry spokesman hossam
abdel-ghafar told ahram online . he said 40 people were injured . ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis

afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack , which came hours after another operation that
the group also claimed . in that earlier attack , a ﬁrst lieutenant , a sergeant and four conscripts
were killed when their armored vehicle was attacked on the highway from al-arish to sheikh
zuweid in northern sinai , the military said . two other soldiers were injured and taken to a
military hospital . ansar beit al-maqdis has claimed many attacks against the army and police

in sinai . a third attack sunday on a checkpoint in rafah left three security personnel injured

, after unknown assailants opened ﬁre at them , according to state media . the attacks come

as the military announced a reshufﬂe of several senior military positions , state media reported

. among those being replaced are the generals in charge of military intelligence and egypt ’s

second ﬁeld army , which is spearheading the battle against the insurgents in the northern sinai

. egypt ’s army has been ﬁghting a decade-long militant islamist insurgency , which has spiked

since the ouster of muslim brotherhood president mohamed morsy in the summer of 2013 .

hundreds of police and soldiers , as well as civilians , have been killed in militant attacks in

the past months . ian lee reported from cairo . anas hamdan reported from atlanta .

Reference Summary:
six people , including one civilian , are killed when a car bomb explodes near a police station .
six others are killed when their armored vehicle is attacked on a highway in northern sinai .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claims responsibility .

Baseline:
he says the attacks come after another operation that killed 12 .
the attacks come as military announced a u.n. peacekeeping force in northern sinai .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .
the attacks come as the military announced a reshufﬂe of several senior military positions .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
six people ,

including one civilian , were killed when a car bomb explodes near the police

station .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .

egypt ’s army has been ﬁghting a decade-long militant islamist insurgency .

Figure 15: The baseline model fabricates a completely false detail about a u.n. peacekeeping force that
is not mentioned in the article. This is most likely inspired by a connection between U.N. peacekeeping
forces and northern sinai in the training data. The pointer-generator model is more accurate, correctly
reporting the reshufﬂe of several senior military positions.

Get To The Point: Summarization with Pointer-Generator Networks

Abigail See
Stanford University
abisee@stanford.edu

Peter J. Liu
Google Brain
peterjliu@google.com

Christopher D. Manning
Stanford University
manning@stanford.edu

7
1
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
2
 
 
]
L
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
2
v
8
6
3
4
0
.
4
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Neural sequence-to-sequence models have
provided a viable new approach for ab-
stractive text summarization (meaning
they are not restricted to simply selecting
and rearranging passages from the origi-
nal text). However, these models have two
shortcomings: they are liable to reproduce
factual details inaccurately, and they tend
to repeat themselves. In this work we pro-
pose a novel architecture that augments the
standard sequence-to-sequence attentional
model in two orthogonal ways.
First,
we use a hybrid pointer-generator network
that can copy words from the source text
via pointing, which aids accurate repro-
duction of information, while retaining the
ability to produce novel words through the
generator. Second, we use coverage to
keep track of what has been summarized,
which discourages repetition. We apply
our model to the CNN / Daily Mail sum-
marization task, outperforming the current
abstractive state-of-the-art by at least 2
ROUGE points.

Original Text (truncated): lagos, nigeria (cnn) a day after winning nige-
ria’s presidency, muhammadu buhari told cnn’s christiane amanpour that
he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria
and go after the root of the nation’s unrest. buhari said he’ll “rapidly give
attention” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria, where the ter-
rorist group boko haram operates. by cooperating with neighboring nations
chad, cameroon and niger, he said his administration is conﬁdent it will
be able to thwart criminals and others contributing to nigeria’s instability.
for the ﬁrst time in nigeria’s history, the opposition defeated the ruling party
in democratic elections. buhari defeated incumbent goodluck jonathan by
about 2 million votes, according to nigeria’s independent national electoral
commission. the win comes after a long history of military rule, coups
and botched attempts at democracy in africa’s most populous nation.

Baseline Seq2Seq + Attention: UNK UNK says his administration is conﬁ-
dent it will be able to destabilize nigeria’s economy. UNK says his admin-
istration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals and other nigerians.
he says the country has long nigeria and nigeria’s economy.

Pointer-Gen: muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght cor-
ruption in the northeast part of nigeria. he says he’ll “rapidly give at-
tention” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria. he says his
administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals.

Pointer-Gen + Coverage: muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively
ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria. he says his administration is
conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals. the win comes after a long his-
tory of military rule, coups and botched attempts at democracy in africa’s
most populous nation.

Figure 1: Comparison of output of 3 abstrac-
tive summarization models on a news article. The
baseline model makes factual errors, a nonsen-
sical sentence and struggles with OOV words
muhammadu buhari. The pointer-generator model
is accurate but repeats itself. Coverage eliminates
repetition. The ﬁnal summary is composed from
several fragments.

1

Introduction

Summarization is the task of condensing a piece of
text to a shorter version that contains the main in-
formation from the original. There are two broad
approaches to summarization: extractive and ab-
stractive. Extractive methods assemble summaries
exclusively from passages (usually whole sen-
tences) taken directly from the source text, while
abstractive methods may generate novel words
and phrases not featured in the source text – as
a human-written abstract usually does. The ex-
tractive approach is easier, because copying large

chunks of text from the source document ensures
baseline levels of grammaticality and accuracy.
On the other hand, sophisticated abilities that are
crucial to high-quality summarization, such as
paraphrasing, generalization, or the incorporation
of real-world knowledge, are possible only in an
abstractive framework (see Figure 5).

Due to the difﬁculty of abstractive summariza-
tion, the great majority of past work has been ex-
tractive (Kupiec et al., 1995; Paice, 1990; Sag-
gion and Poibeau, 2013). However, the recent suc-
cess of sequence-to-sequence models (Sutskever

Figure 2: Baseline sequence-to-sequence model with attention. The model may attend to relevant words
in the source text to generate novel words, e.g., to produce the novel word beat in the abstractive summary
Germany beat Argentina 2-0 the model may attend to the words victorious and win in the source text.

et al., 2014), in which recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) both read and freely generate text, has
made abstractive summarization viable (Chopra
et al., 2016; Nallapati et al., 2016; Rush et al.,
2015; Zeng et al., 2016). Though these systems
are promising, they exhibit undesirable behavior
such as inaccurately reproducing factual details,
an inability to deal with out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
words, and repeating themselves (see Figure 1).

In this paper we present an architecture that
addresses these three issues in the context of
multi-sentence summaries. While most recent ab-
stractive work has focused on headline genera-
tion tasks (reducing one or two sentences to a
single headline), we believe that longer-text sum-
marization is both more challenging (requiring
higher levels of abstraction while avoiding repe-
tition) and ultimately more useful. Therefore we
apply our model to the recently-introduced CNN/
Daily Mail dataset (Hermann et al., 2015; Nallap-
ati et al., 2016), which contains news articles (39
sentences on average) paired with multi-sentence
summaries, and show that we outperform the state-
of-the-art abstractive system by at least 2 ROUGE
points.

Our hybrid pointer-generator network facili-
tates copying words from the source text via point-
ing (Vinyals et al., 2015), which improves accu-
racy and handling of OOV words, while retaining
the ability to generate new words. The network,
which can be viewed as a balance between extrac-
tive and abstractive approaches, is similar to Gu
et al.’s (2016) CopyNet and Miao and Blunsom’s
(2016) Forced-Attention Sentence Compression,

that were applied to short-text summarization. We
propose a novel variant of the coverage vector (Tu
et al., 2016) from Neural Machine Translation,
which we use to track and control coverage of the
source document. We show that coverage is re-
markably effective for eliminating repetition.

2 Our Models

In this section we describe (1) our baseline
(2) our pointer-
sequence-to-sequence model,
generator model, and (3) our coverage mechanism
that can be added to either of the ﬁrst two models.
The code for our models is available online.1

2.1 Sequence-to-sequence attentional model

Our baseline model is similar to that of Nallapati
et al. (2016), and is depicted in Figure 2. The to-
kens of the article wi are fed one-by-one into the
encoder (a single-layer bidirectional LSTM), pro-
ducing a sequence of encoder hidden states hi. On
each step t, the decoder (a single-layer unidirec-
tional LSTM) receives the word embedding of the
previous word (while training, this is the previous
word of the reference summary; at test time it is
the previous word emitted by the decoder), and
has decoder state st. The attention distribution at
is calculated as in Bahdanau et al. (2015):

et
i = vT tanh(Whhi +Wsst + battn)
at = softmax(et)

(1)

(2)

where v, Wh, Ws and battn are learnable parame-
ters. The attention distribution can be viewed as

1www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

Figure 3: Pointer-generator model. For each decoder timestep a generation probability pgen ∈ [0, 1] is
calculated, which weights the probability of generating words from the vocabulary, versus copying words
from the source text. The vocabulary distribution and the attention distribution are weighted and summed
to obtain the ﬁnal distribution, from which we make our prediction. Note that out-of-vocabulary article
words such as 2-0 are included in the ﬁnal distribution. Best viewed in color.

a probability distribution over the source words,
that tells the decoder where to look to produce the
next word. Next, the attention distribution is used
to produce a weighted sum of the encoder hidden
states, known as the context vector h∗
t :
t = ∑i at
h∗
The context vector, which can be seen as a ﬁxed-
size representation of what has been read from the
source for this step, is concatenated with the de-
coder state st and fed through two linear layers to
produce the vocabulary distribution Pvocab:
t ] + b) + b(cid:48))

Pvocab = softmax(V (cid:48)(V [st, h∗

ihi

(4)

(3)

where V , V (cid:48), b and b(cid:48) are learnable parameters.
Pvocab is a probability distribution over all words
in the vocabulary, and provides us with our ﬁnal
distribution from which to predict words w:

P(w) = Pvocab(w)

During training, the loss for timestep t is the neg-
ative log likelihood of the target word w∗
t for that
timestep:

losst = − log P(w∗
t )
and the overall loss for the whole sequence is:

(5)

(6)

(7)

loss =

1

T ∑T

t=0 losst

2.2 Pointer-generator network

Our pointer-generator network is a hybrid between
our baseline and a pointer network (Vinyals et al.,
2015), as it allows both copying words via point-
ing, and generating words from a ﬁxed vocabulary.
In the pointer-generator model (depicted in Figure
3) the attention distribution at and context vector
h∗
t are calculated as in section 2.1. In addition, the
generation probability pgen ∈ [0, 1] for timestep t is
calculated from the context vector h∗
t , the decoder
state st and the decoder input xt:

(8)

h∗h∗

s st + wT

x xt + bptr)

pgen = σ (wT

t + wT
where vectors wh∗, ws, wx and scalar bptr are learn-
able parameters and σ is the sigmoid function.
Next, pgen is used as a soft switch to choose be-
tween generating a word from the vocabulary by
sampling from Pvocab, or copying a word from the
input sequence by sampling from the attention dis-
tribution at. For each document let the extended
vocabulary denote the union of the vocabulary,
and all words appearing in the source document.
We obtain the following probability distribution
over the extended vocabulary:
P(w) = pgenPvocab(w) + (1 − pgen)∑i:wi=w at
Note that if w is an out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
word, then Pvocab(w) is zero; similarly if w does

i (9)

not appear in the source document, then ∑i:wi=w at
i
is zero. The ability to produce OOV words is
one of the primary advantages of pointer-generator
models; by contrast models such as our baseline
are restricted to their pre-set vocabulary.

The loss function is as described in equations
(6) and (7), but with respect to our modiﬁed prob-
ability distribution P(w) given in equation (9).

Our loss function is more ﬂexible: because sum-
marization should not require uniform coverage,
we only penalize the overlap between each atten-
tion distribution and the coverage so far – prevent-
ing repeated attention. Finally, the coverage loss,
reweighted by some hyperparameter λ , is added to
the primary loss function to yield a new composite
loss function:

2.3 Coverage mechanism

Repetition is a common problem for sequence-
to-sequence models (Tu et al., 2016; Mi et al.,
2016; Sankaran et al., 2016; Suzuki and Nagata,
2016), and is especially pronounced when gener-
ating multi-sentence text (see Figure 1). We adapt
the coverage model of Tu et al. (2016) to solve the
problem. In our coverage model, we maintain a
coverage vector ct, which is the sum of attention
distributions over all previous decoder timesteps:

t(cid:48)=0

at(cid:48)

(10)

ct = ∑t−1
Intuitively, ct is a (unnormalized) distribution over
the source document words that represents the de-
gree of coverage that those words have received
from the attention mechanism so far. Note that c0
is a zero vector, because on the ﬁrst timestep, none
of the source document has been covered.

The coverage vector is used as extra input to the

attention mechanism, changing equation (1) to:

i = vT tanh(Whhi +Wsst + wcct
et

i + battn)

(11)

where wc is a learnable parameter vector of same
length as v. This ensures that the attention mecha-
nism’s current decision (choosing where to attend
next) is informed by a reminder of its previous
decisions (summarized in ct). This should make
it easier for the attention mechanism to avoid re-
peatedly attending to the same locations, and thus
avoid generating repetitive text.

We ﬁnd it necessary (see section 5) to addition-
ally deﬁne a coverage loss to penalize repeatedly
attending to the same locations:

covlosst = ∑i min(at

i, ct
i)

(12)

Note that the coverage loss is bounded; in particu-
lar covlosst ≤ ∑i at
i = 1. Equation (12) differs from
the coverage loss used in Machine Translation. In
MT, we assume that there should be a roughly one-
to-one translation ratio; accordingly the ﬁnal cov-
erage vector is penalized if it is more or less than 1.

losst = − log P(w∗

t ) + λ ∑i min(at

i, ct
i)

(13)

3 Related Work

Neural abstractive summarization. Rush et al.
(2015) were the ﬁrst to apply modern neural net-
works to abstractive text summarization, achiev-
ing state-of-the-art performance on DUC-2004
and Gigaword, two sentence-level summarization
datasets. Their approach, which is centered on the
attention mechanism, has been augmented with re-
current decoders (Chopra et al., 2016), Abstract
Meaning Representations (Takase et al., 2016), hi-
erarchical networks (Nallapati et al., 2016), vari-
ational autoencoders (Miao and Blunsom, 2016),
and direct optimization of the performance metric
(Ranzato et al., 2016), further improving perfor-
mance on those datasets.

However, large-scale datasets for summariza-
tion of longer text are rare. Nallapati et al. (2016)
adapted the DeepMind question-answering dataset
(Hermann et al., 2015) for summarization, result-
ing in the CNN/Daily Mail dataset, and provided
the ﬁrst abstractive baselines. The same authors
then published a neural extractive approach (Nal-
lapati et al., 2017), which uses hierarchical RNNs
to select sentences, and found that it signiﬁcantly
outperformed their abstractive result with respect
to the ROUGE metric. To our knowledge, these
are the only two published results on the full data-
set.

Prior to modern neural methods, abstractive
summarization received less attention than extrac-
tive summarization, but Jing (2000) explored cut-
ting unimportant parts of sentences to create sum-
maries, and Cheung and Penn (2014) explore sen-
tence fusion using dependency trees.

Pointer-generator networks. The pointer net-
work (Vinyals et al., 2015) is a sequence-to-
sequence model that uses the soft attention dis-
tribution of Bahdanau et al.
(2015) to produce
an output sequence consisting of elements from

the input sequence. The pointer network has been
used to create hybrid approaches for NMT (Gul-
cehre et al., 2016), language modeling (Merity
et al., 2016), and summarization (Gu et al., 2016;
Gulcehre et al., 2016; Miao and Blunsom, 2016;
Nallapati et al., 2016; Zeng et al., 2016).

Our approach is close to the Forced-Attention
Sentence Compression model of Miao and Blun-
som (2016) and the CopyNet model of Gu et al.
(2016), with some small differences: (i) We cal-
culate an explicit switch probability pgen, whereas
Gu et al. induce competition through a shared soft-
max function. (ii) We recycle the attention distri-
bution to serve as the copy distribution, but Gu et
al. use two separate distributions.
(iii) When a
word appears multiple times in the source text, we
sum probability mass from all corresponding parts
of the attention distribution, whereas Miao and
Blunsom do not. Our reasoning is that (i) calcu-
lating an explicit pgen usefully enables us to raise
or lower the probability of all generated words or
all copy words at once, rather than individually,
(ii) the two distributions serve such similar pur-
poses that we ﬁnd our simpler approach sufﬁces,
and (iii) we observe that the pointer mechanism
often copies a word while attending to multiple oc-
currences of it in the source text.

Our approach is considerably different from
that of Gulcehre et al. (2016) and Nallapati et al.
(2016). Those works train their pointer compo-
nents to activate only for out-of-vocabulary words
or named entities (whereas we allow our model to
freely learn when to use the pointer), and they do
not mix the probabilities from the copy distribu-
tion and the vocabulary distribution. We believe
the mixture approach described here is better for
abstractive summarization – in section 6 we show
that the copy mechanism is vital for accurately
reproducing rare but in-vocabulary words, and in
section 7.2 we observe that the mixture model en-
ables the language model and copy mechanism to
work together to perform abstractive copying.

Coverage. Originating from Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (Koehn, 2009), coverage was
adapted for NMT by Tu et al. (2016) and Mi et al.
(2016), who both use a GRU to update the cov-
erage vector each step. We ﬁnd that a simpler
approach – summing the attention distributions to
obtain the coverage vector – sufﬁces. In this re-
spect our approach is similar to Xu et al. (2015),
who apply a coverage-like method to image cap-

tioning, and Chen et al. (2016), who also incorpo-
rate a coverage mechanism (which they call ‘dis-
traction’) as described in equation (11) into neural
summarization of longer text.

Temporal attention is a related technique that
has been applied to NMT (Sankaran et al., 2016)
and summarization (Nallapati et al., 2016).
In
this approach, each attention distribution is di-
vided by the sum of the previous, which effec-
tively dampens repeated attention. We tried this
method but found it too destructive, distorting the
signal from the attention mechanism and reducing
performance. We hypothesize that an early inter-
vention method such as coverage is preferable to
a post hoc method such as temporal attention – it
is better to inform the attention mechanism to help
it make better decisions, than to override its de-
cisions altogether. This theory is supported by the
large boost that coverage gives our ROUGE scores
(see Table 1), compared to the smaller boost given
by temporal attention for the same task (Nallapati
et al., 2016).

4 Dataset

We use the CNN/Daily Mail dataset (Hermann
et al., 2015; Nallapati et al., 2016), which con-
tains online news articles (781 tokens on average)
paired with multi-sentence summaries (3.75 sen-
tences or 56 tokens on average). We used scripts
supplied by Nallapati et al. (2016) to obtain the
same version of the the data, which has 287,226
training pairs, 13,368 validation pairs and 11,490
test pairs. Both the dataset’s published results
(Nallapati et al., 2016, 2017) use the anonymized
version of the data, which has been pre-processed
to replace each named entity, e.g., The United Na-
tions, with its own unique identiﬁer for the exam-
ple pair, e.g., @entity5. By contrast, we operate
directly on the original text (or non-anonymized
version of the data),2 which we believe is the fa-
vorable problem to solve because it requires no
pre-processing.

5 Experiments

all

experiments,

our model has 256-
For
dimensional hidden states and 128-dimensional
word embeddings. For the pointer-generator mod-
els, we use a vocabulary of 50k words for both
source and target – note that due to the pointer net-
work’s ability to handle OOV words, we can use

2at www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

METEOR
exact match + stem/syn/para

abstractive model (Nallapati et al., 2016)*
seq-to-seq + attn baseline (150k vocab)
seq-to-seq + attn baseline (50k vocab)
pointer-generator
pointer-generator + coverage
lead-3 baseline (ours)
lead-3 baseline (Nallapati et al., 2017)*
extractive model (Nallapati et al., 2017)*

ROUGE
2
13.30
11.17
11.81
15.66
17.28
17.70
15.7
16.2

L
32.65
28.08
28.83
33.42
36.38
36.57
35.5
35.3

1
35.46
30.49
31.33
36.44
39.53
40.34
39.2
39.6

-
11.65
12.03
15.35
17.32
20.48
-
-

-
12.86
13.20
16.65
18.72
22.21
-
-

Table 1: ROUGE F1 and METEOR scores on the test set. Models and baselines in the top half are
abstractive, while those in the bottom half are extractive. Those marked with * were trained and evaluated
on the anonymized dataset, and so are not strictly comparable to our results on the original text. All our
ROUGE scores have a 95% conﬁdence interval of at most ±0.25 as reported by the ofﬁcial ROUGE
script. The METEOR improvement from the 50k baseline to the pointer-generator model, and from the
pointer-generator to the pointer-generator+coverage model, were both found to be statistically signiﬁcant
using an approximate randomization test with p < 0.01.

a smaller vocabulary size than Nallapati et al.’s
(2016) 150k source and 60k target vocabularies.
For the baseline model, we also try a larger vocab-
ulary size of 150k.

Note that the pointer and the coverage mecha-
nism introduce very few additional parameters to
the network: for the models with vocabulary size
50k, the baseline model has 21,499,600 parame-
ters, the pointer-generator adds 1153 extra param-
eters (wh∗, ws, wx and bptr in equation 8), and cov-
erage adds 512 extra parameters (wc in equation
11).

Unlike Nallapati et al. (2016), we do not pre-
train the word embeddings – they are learned
from scratch during training. We train using Ada-
grad (Duchi et al., 2011) with learning rate 0.15
and an initial accumulator value of 0.1.
(This
was found to work best of Stochastic Gradient
Descent, Adadelta, Momentum, Adam and RM-
SProp). We use gradient clipping with a maximum
gradient norm of 2, but do not use any form of reg-
ularization. We use loss on the validation set to
implement early stopping.

During training and at test time we truncate the
article to 400 tokens and limit the length of the
summary to 100 tokens for training and 120 to-
kens at test time.3 This is done to expedite train-
ing and testing, but we also found that truncating
the article can raise the performance of the model

3The upper limit of 120 is mostly invisible:

the beam
search algorithm is self-stopping and almost never reaches
the 120th step.

(see section 7.1 for more details). For training,
we found it efﬁcient to start with highly-truncated
sequences, then raise the maximum length once
converged. We train on a single Tesla K40m GPU
with a batch size of 16. At test time our summaries
are produced using beam search with beam size 4.

We trained both our baseline models for about
600,000 iterations (33 epochs) – this is similar
to the 35 epochs required by Nallapati et al.’s
(2016) best model. Training took 4 days and 14
hours for the 50k vocabulary model, and 8 days 21
hours for the 150k vocabulary model. We found
the pointer-generator model quicker to train, re-
quiring less than 230,000 training iterations (12.8
In par-
epochs); a total of 3 days and 4 hours.
ticular, the pointer-generator model makes much
quicker progress in the early phases of training.
To obtain our ﬁnal coverage model, we added the
coverage mechanism with coverage loss weighted
to λ = 1 (as described in equation 13), and trained
for a further 3000 iterations (about 2 hours).
In
this time the coverage loss converged to about 0.2,
down from an initial value of about 0.5. We also
tried a more aggressive value of λ = 2; this re-
duced coverage loss but increased the primary loss
function, thus we did not use it.

We tried training the coverage model without
the loss function, hoping that the attention mech-
anism may learn by itself not to attend repeatedly
to the same locations, but we found this to be inef-
fective, with no discernible reduction in repetition.
We also tried training with coverage from the ﬁrst

iteration rather than as a separate training phase,
but found that in the early phase of training, the
coverage objective interfered with the main objec-
tive, reducing overall performance.

6 Results

6.1 Preliminaries

Our results are given in Table 1. We evalu-
ate our models with the standard ROUGE metric
(Lin, 2004b), reporting the F1 scores for ROUGE-
1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L (which respectively
measure the word-overlap, bigram-overlap, and
longest common sequence between the reference
summary and the summary to be evaluated). We
obtain our ROUGE scores using the pyrouge
package.4 We also evaluate with the METEOR
metric (Denkowski and Lavie, 2014), both in ex-
act match mode (rewarding only exact matches
between words) and full mode (which addition-
ally rewards matching stems, synonyms and para-
phrases).5

In addition to our own models, we also report
the lead-3 baseline (which uses the ﬁrst three sen-
tences of the article as a summary), and compare
to the only existing abstractive (Nallapati et al.,
2016) and extractive (Nallapati et al., 2017) mod-
els on the full dataset. The output of our models is
available online.6

Given that we generate plain-text summaries but
Nallapati et al. (2016; 2017) generate anonymized
summaries (see Section 4), our ROUGE scores
are not strictly comparable. There is evidence
to suggest that the original-text dataset may re-
sult in higher ROUGE scores in general than the
anonymized dataset – the lead-3 baseline is higher
on the former than the latter. One possible expla-
nation is that multi-word named entities lead to
a higher rate of n-gram overlap. Unfortunately,
ROUGE is the only available means of compar-
ison with Nallapati et al.’s work. Nevertheless,
given that the disparity in the lead-3 scores is
(+1.1 ROUGE-1, +2.0 ROUGE-2, +1.1 ROUGE-
L) points respectively, and our best model scores
exceed Nallapati et al. (2016) by (+4.07 ROUGE-
1, +3.98 ROUGE-2, +3.73 ROUGE-L) points, we
may estimate that we outperform the only previous
abstractive system by at least 2 ROUGE points all-
round.

4pypi.python.org/pypi/pyrouge/0.1.3
5www.cs.cmu.edu/~alavie/METEOR
6www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

30

20

10

s
e
t
a
c
i
l
p
u
d

e
r
a

t
a
h
t

%

0
1 - g r a

m s

m s

2 - g r a

m s

3 - g r a

4 - g r a

m s

n t e

s e

e s

c

n

pointer-generator, no coverage
pointer-generator + coverage
reference summaries

Figure 4: Coverage eliminates undesirable repe-
tition. Summaries from our non-coverage model
contain many duplicated n-grams while our cover-
age model produces a similar number as the ref-
erence summaries.

6.2 Observations

We ﬁnd that both our baseline models perform
poorly with respect to ROUGE and METEOR, and
in fact the larger vocabulary size (150k) does not
seem to help. Even the better-performing baseline
(with 50k vocabulary) produces summaries with
several common problems. Factual details are fre-
quently reproduced incorrectly, often replacing an
uncommon (but in-vocabulary) word with a more-
common alternative. For example in Figure 1,
the baseline model appears to struggle with the
rare word thwart, producing destabilize instead,
which leads to the fabricated phrase destabilize
nigeria’s economy. Even more catastrophically,
the summaries sometimes devolve into repetitive
nonsense, such as the third sentence produced by
the baseline model in Figure 1.
In addition, the
baseline model can’t reproduce out-of-vocabulary
words (such as muhammadu buhari in Figure 1).
Further examples of all these problems are pro-
vided in the supplementary material.

Our pointer-generator model achieves much
better ROUGE and METEOR scores than the
baseline, despite many fewer training epochs. The
difference in the summaries is also marked: out-
of-vocabulary words are handled easily, factual
details are almost always copied correctly, and
there are no fabrications (see Figure 1). However,
repetition is still very common.

Our pointer-generator model with coverage im-
proves the ROUGE and METEOR scores further,
convincingly surpassing the best abstractive model

Article: smugglers lure arab and african migrants by offer-
ing discounts to get onto overcrowded ships if people bring
more potential passengers, a cnn investigation has revealed.
(...)
Summary: cnn investigation uncovers the business inside
a human smuggling ring.

Article: eyewitness video showing white north charleston
police ofﬁcer michael slager shooting to death an unarmed
black man has exposed discrepancies in the reports of the
ﬁrst ofﬁcers on the scene. (...)
Summary: more questions than answers emerge in con-
troversial s.c. police shooting.

Figure 5: Examples of highly abstractive reference
summaries (bold denotes novel words).

of Nallapati et al.
(2016) by several ROUGE
points. Despite the brevity of the coverage train-
ing phase (about 1% of the total training time),
the repetition problem is almost completely elimi-
nated, which can be seen both qualitatively (Figure
1) and quantitatively (Figure 4). However, our best
model does not quite surpass the ROUGE scores
of the lead-3 baseline, nor the current best extrac-
tive model (Nallapati et al., 2017). We discuss this
issue in section 7.1.

7 Discussion

7.1 Comparison with extractive systems

It is clear from Table 1 that extractive systems tend
to achieve higher ROUGE scores than abstractive,
and that the extractive lead-3 baseline is extremely
strong (even the best extractive system beats it by
only a small margin). We offer two possible ex-
planations for these observations.

Firstly, news articles tend to be structured with
the most important information at the start; this
partially explains the strength of the lead-3 base-
line. Indeed, we found that using only the ﬁrst 400
tokens (about 20 sentences) of the article yielded
signiﬁcantly higher ROUGE scores than using the
ﬁrst 800 tokens.

Secondly, the nature of the task and the ROUGE
metric make extractive approaches and the lead-
3 baseline difﬁcult to beat. The choice of con-
tent for the reference summaries is quite subjective
– sometimes the sentences form a self-contained
summary; other times they simply showcase a few
interesting details from the article. Given that the
articles contain 39 sentences on average, there are
many equally valid ways to choose 3 or 4 high-
lights in this style. Abstraction introduces even
more options (choice of phrasing), further decreas-

ing the likelihood of matching the reference sum-
mary. For example, smugglers proﬁt from des-
perate migrants is a valid alternative abstractive
summary for the ﬁrst example in Figure 5, but
it scores 0 ROUGE with respect to the reference
summary. This inﬂexibility of ROUGE is exac-
erbated by only having one reference summary,
which has been shown to lower ROUGE’s relia-
bility compared to multiple reference summaries
(Lin, 2004a).

Due to the subjectivity of the task and thus
the diversity of valid summaries, it seems that
ROUGE rewards safe strategies such as select-
ing the ﬁrst-appearing content, or preserving orig-
inal phrasing. While the reference summaries do
sometimes deviate from these techniques, those
deviations are unpredictable enough that the safer
strategy obtains higher ROUGE scores on average.
This may explain why extractive systems tend to
obtain higher ROUGE scores than abstractive, and
even extractive systems do not signiﬁcantly ex-
ceed the lead-3 baseline.

To explore this issue further, we evaluated our
systems with the METEOR metric, which rewards
not only exact word matches, but also matching
stems, synonyms and paraphrases (from a pre-
deﬁned list). We observe that all our models re-
ceive over 1 METEOR point boost by the inclu-
sion of stem, synonym and paraphrase matching,
indicating that they may be performing some ab-
straction. However, we again observe that the
lead-3 baseline is not surpassed by our models.
It may be that news article style makes the lead-
3 baseline very strong with respect to any metric.
We believe that investigating this issue further is
an important direction for future work.

7.2 How abstractive is our model?

We have shown that our pointer mechanism makes
our abstractive system more reliable, copying fac-
tual details correctly more often. But does the ease
of copying make our system any less abstractive?
Figure 6 shows that our ﬁnal model’s sum-
maries contain a much lower rate of novel n-grams
(i.e., those that don’t appear in the article) than the
reference summaries, indicating a lower degree of
abstraction. Note that the baseline model produces
novel n-grams more frequently – however, this
statistic includes all the incorrectly copied words,
UNK tokens and fabrications alongside the good
instances of abstraction.

l
e
v
o
n

e
r
a

t
a
h
t

%

100
80
60
40
20
0
1 - g r a

m s

m s

2 - g r a

m s

3 - g r a

4 - g r a

m s

n t e

s e

e s

c

n

pointer-generator + coverage
sequence-to-sequence + attention baseline
reference summaries

Figure 6: Although our best model is abstractive,
it does not produce novel n-grams (i.e., n-grams
that don’t appear in the source text) as often as
the reference summaries. The baseline model
produces more novel n-grams, but many of these
are erroneous (see section 7.2).

Article: andy murray (...) is into the semi-ﬁnals of the mi-
ami open , but not before getting a scare from 21 year-old
austrian dominic thiem, who pushed him to 4-4 in the sec-
ond set before going down 3-6 6-4, 6-1 in an hour and three
quarters. (...)
Summary: andy murray defeated dominic thiem 3-6 6-4,
6-1 in an hour and three quarters.

Article: (...) wayne rooney smashes home during manch-
ester united ’s 3-1 win over aston villa on saturday. (...)
Summary: manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old
trafford on saturday.

Figure 7: Examples of abstractive summaries pro-
duced by our model (bold denotes novel words).

In particular, Figure 6 shows that our ﬁnal
model copies whole article sentences 35% of the
time; by comparison the reference summaries do
so only 1.3% of the time. This is a main area for
improvement, as we would like our model to move
beyond simple sentence extraction. However, we
observe that the other 65% encompasses a range of
abstractive techniques. Article sentences are trun-
cated to form grammatically-correct shorter ver-
sions, and new sentences are composed by stitch-
ing together fragments. Unnecessary interjections,
clauses and parenthesized phrases are sometimes
omitted from copied passages. Some of these abil-
ities are demonstrated in Figure 1, and the supple-
mentary material contains more examples.

Figure 7 shows two examples of more impres-
sive abstraction – both with similar structure. The
dataset contains many sports stories whose sum-
maries follow the X beat Y (cid:104)score(cid:105) on (cid:104)day(cid:105) tem-

plate, which may explain why our model is most
conﬁdently abstractive on these examples. In gen-
eral however, our model does not routinely pro-
duce summaries like those in Figure 7, and is not
close to producing summaries like in Figure 5.

The value of the generation probability pgen
also gives a measure of the abstractiveness of our
model. During training, pgen starts with a value
of about 0.30 then increases, converging to about
0.53 by the end of training. This indicates that
the model ﬁrst learns to mostly copy, then learns
to generate about half the time. However at test
time, pgen is heavily skewed towards copying, with
a mean value of 0.17. The disparity is likely
due to the fact that during training, the model re-
ceives word-by-word supervision in the form of
the reference summary, but at test time it does
not. Nonetheless, the generator module is use-
ful even when the model is copying. We ﬁnd
that pgen is highest at times of uncertainty such
as the beginning of sentences, the join between
stitched-together fragments, and when producing
periods that truncate a copied sentence. Our mix-
ture model allows the network to copy while si-
multaneously consulting the language model – en-
abling operations like stitching and truncation to
In any case,
be performed with grammaticality.
encouraging the pointer-generator model to write
more abstractively, while retaining the accuracy
advantages of the pointer module, is an exciting
direction for future work.

8 Conclusion

In this work we presented a hybrid pointer-
generator architecture with coverage, and showed
that it reduces inaccuracies and repetition. We ap-
plied our model to a new and challenging long-
text dataset, and signiﬁcantly outperformed the
abstractive state-of-the-art result. Our model ex-
hibits many abstractive abilities, but attaining
higher levels of abstraction remains an open re-
search question.

9 Acknowledgment

We thank the ACL reviewers for their helpful com-
ments. This work was begun while the ﬁrst author
was an intern at Google Brain and continued at
Stanford. Stanford University gratefully acknowl-
edges the support of the DARPA DEFT Program
AFRL contract no. FA8750-13-2-0040. Any opin-
ions in this material are those of the authors alone.

References

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.

Qian Chen, Xiaodan Zhu, Zhenhua Ling, Si Wei, and
Hui Jiang. 2016. Distraction-based neural networks
In International Joint
for modeling documents.
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

Jackie Chi Kit Cheung and Gerald Penn. 2014. Unsu-
pervised sentence enhancement for automatic sum-
marization. In Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Alexander M Rush.
2016. Abstractive sentence summarization with at-
In North Amer-
tentive recurrent neural networks.
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2014. Meteor
universal: Language speciﬁc translation evaluation
In EACL 2014 Workshop
for any target language.
on Statistical Machine Translation.

John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. 2011.
Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning
Journal of Machine
and stochastic optimization.
Learning Research 12:2121–2159.

Jiatao Gu, Zhengdong Lu, Hang Li, and Victor OK
Incorporating copying mechanism in
In Association for

Li. 2016.
sequence-to-sequence learning.
Computational Linguistics.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004b. Rouge: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. In Text summariza-
tion branches out: ACL workshop.

Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and
Pointer sentinel mixture
Richard Socher. 2016.
In NIPS 2016 Workshop on Multi-class
models.
and Multi-label Learning in Extremely Large Label
Spaces.

Haitao Mi, Baskaran Sankaran, Zhiguo Wang, and Abe
Ittycheriah. 2016. Coverage embedding models for
neural machine translation. In Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing.

Yishu Miao and Phil Blunsom. 2016. Language as a
latent variable: Discrete generative models for sen-
tence compression. In Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing.

Ramesh Nallapati, Feifei Zhai, and Bowen Zhou. 2017.
SummaRuNNer: A recurrent neural network based
sequence model for extractive summarization of
documents. In Association for the Advancement of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Cicero dos Santos,
C¸ aglar Gulc¸ehre, and Bing Xiang. 2016. Abstrac-
tive text summarization using sequence-to-sequence
RNNs and beyond. In Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning.

Chris D Paice. 1990. Constructing literature abstracts
by computer: techniques and prospects. Information
Processing & Management 26(1):171–186.

Caglar Gulcehre, Sungjin Ahn, Ramesh Nallapati,
Bowen Zhou, and Yoshua Bengio. 2016. Pointing
In Association for Computa-
the unknown words.
tional Linguistics.

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli,
and Wojciech Zaremba. 2016. Sequence level train-
ing with recurrent neural networks. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.

Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward
Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Su-
leyman, and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching ma-
chines to read and comprehend. In Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems.

Hongyan Jing. 2000. Sentence reduction for automatic
In Applied natural language

text summarization.
processing.

Philipp Koehn. 2009. Statistical machine translation.

Cambridge University Press.

Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen, and Francine Chen. 1995.
A trainable document summarizer. In International
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004a.

Looking for a few good
metrics: Automatic summarization evaluation-how
In NACSIS/NII Test
many samples are enough?
Collection for Information Retrieval (NTCIR) Work-
shop.

Alexander M Rush, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston.
2015. A neural attention model for abstractive sen-
tence summarization. In Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing.

Horacio Saggion and Thierry Poibeau. 2013. Auto-
matic text summarization: Past, present and future.
In Multi-source, Multilingual Information Extrac-
tion and Summarization, Springer, pages 3–21.

Baskaran Sankaran, Haitao Mi, Yaser Al-Onaizan, and
Abe Ittycheriah. 2016. Temporal attention model
arXiv preprint
for neural machine translation.
arXiv:1608.02927 .

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Neural Information Processing Systems.

Jun Suzuki and Masaaki Nagata. 2016. RNN-based
encoder-decoder approach with word frequency es-
timation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.00138 .

Sho Takase, Jun Suzuki, Naoaki Okazaki, Tsutomu Hi-
rao, and Masaaki Nagata. 2016. Neural headline
generation on abstract meaning representation.
In
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing.

Zhaopeng Tu, Zhengdong Lu, Yang Liu, Xiaohua Liu,
and Hang Li. 2016. Modeling coverage for neural
In Association for Computa-
machine translation.
tional Linguistics.

Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly.
2015. Pointer networks. In Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems.

Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho,
Aaron C Courville, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Richard S
Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show, attend and
tell: Neural image caption generation with visual
attention. In International Conference on Machine
Learning.

Wenyuan Zeng, Wenjie Luo, Sanja Fidler, and Raquel
Efﬁcient summarization with
arXiv preprint

Urtasun. 2016.
read-again and copy mechanism.
arXiv:1611.03382 .

Supplementary Material

This appendix provides examples from the test set, with side-by-side comparisons of the reference sum-
maries and the summaries produced by our models. In each example:

• italics denote out-of-vocabulary words

• red denotes factual errors in the summaries

• green shading intensity represents the value of the generation probability pgen

• yellow shading intensity represents ﬁnal value of the coverage vector at the end of ﬁnal model’s

summarization process.

Article (truncated): andy murray came close to giving himself some extra preparation time for

his wedding next week before ensuring that he still has unﬁnished tennis business to attend to .

the world no 4 is into the semi-ﬁnals of the miami open , but not before getting a scare from
21 year-old austrian dominic thiem , who pushed him to 4-4 in the second set before going

down 3-6 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters . murray was awaiting the winner from the

last eight match between tomas berdych and argentina ’s juan monaco . prior to this tournament
thiem lost in the second round of a challenger event to soon-to-be new brit aljaz bedene . andy
murray pumps his ﬁrst after defeating dominic thiem to reach the miami open semi ﬁnals .
muray throws his sweatband into the crowd after completing a 3-6 , 6-4 , 6-1 victory in ﬂorida
. murray shakes hands with thiem who he described as a ’ strong guy ’ after the game . and

murray has a fairly simple message for any of his fellow british tennis players who might be

agitated about his imminent arrival into the home ranks : do n’t complain . instead the british no

1 believes his colleagues should use the assimilation of the world number 83 , originally from

slovenia , as motivation to better themselves .

Reference Summary:
british no 1 defeated dominic thiem in miami open quarter ﬁnals .
andy murray celebrated his 500th career win in the previous round .
third seed will play the winner of tomas berdych and juan monaco in the semi ﬁnals of the atp masters
1000 event in key biscayne .

Baseline:
andy murray beat UNK bedene 6-3 , 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters .
british no 1 believes his colleagues should use the maze of the world number 83 , originally from
slovenia , as motivation to better themselves .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
andy murray came close to giving himself some extra preparation for his wedding next week before
getting a scare from 21 year-old austrian dominic thiem .
the world no 4 is into the semi-ﬁnals of the miami open , but not before getting a scare from 21 year-old
austrian dominic thiem .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
andy murray defeated dominic thiem 3-6 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters .

murray was awaiting the winner from the last eight match between tomas berdych and argentina

’s juan monaco .

prior to this tournament thiem lost in the second round of a challenger event to soon-to-be new
brit aljaz bedene .

Figure 8: The baseline model reports the wrong score 6-3, substitutes bedene for thiem and strug-
gles with the uncommon word assimilation. The pointer-network models accurately reproduce the out-
of-vocabulary words thiem and aljaz. Note that the ﬁnal model produces the novel word defeated to
incorporate several fragments into a single sentence.

Article (truncated): munster have signed new zealand international francis saili on a two-year
deal . utility back saili , who made his all blacks debut against argentina in 2013 , will move

to the province later this year after the completion of his 2015 contractual commitments . the
24-year-old currently plays for auckland-based super rugby side the blues and was part of the
new zealand under-20 side that won the junior world championship in italy in 2011 . saili ’s

signature is something of a coup for munster and head coach anthony foley believes he will
be a great addition to their backline . francis saili has signed a two-year deal to join munster

and will link up with them later this year . ’ we are really pleased that francis has committed

his future to the province , ’ foley told munster ’s ofﬁcial website . ’ he is a talented centre
with an impressive skill-set and he possesses the physical attributes to excel

in the northern

hemisphere . ’ i believe he will be a great addition to our backline and we look forward to
welcoming him to munster . ’ saili has been capped twice by new zealand and was part of the

under 20 side that won the junior championship in 2011 .

Reference Summary:
utility back francis saili will join up with munster later this year .
the new zealand international has signed a two-year contract .
saili made his debut for the all blacks against argentina in 2013 .

Baseline:
dutch international francis UNK has signed a two-year deal to join irish UNK super rugby side the
blues .
UNK ’s signature is something of a coup for munster and his head coach anthony foley believes he will
be a great addition to their respective prospects .
UNK has been capped twice by new zealand .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
new zealand international francis saili will move to the province later this year .
utility back saili made his all blacks debut against argentina in 2013 .
utility back saili will move to the province later this year .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
francis saili has signed a two-year deal to join munster later this year .

the 24-year-old was part of

the new zealand under-20 side that won the junior world

championship in italy in 2011 .
saili ’s signature is something of a coup for munster and head coach anthony foley .

Figure 9: The baseline model incorrectly substitutes dutch for new zealand (perhaps reﬂecting the Euro-
pean bias of the dataset), fabricates irish, and struggles with out-of-vocabulary words saili and auckland-
based. Though it is not clear why, the phrase addition to our backline is changed to the nonsensical
addition to their respective prospects. The pointer-generator model ﬁxes these accuracy problems, and
the addition of coverage ﬁxes the repetition problem. Note that the ﬁnal model skips over large passages
of text to produce shorter sentences.

Article (truncated): right from the moment he breezed through the doors at old trafford , louis

van gaal was a man with a plan . the ﬁrst season , he stated , would see him deliver manchester

united back into their rightful place in the champions league . he would restore them to the
premier league top four but loftier aims of silverware would have to wait . his three-year vision

would allow for such thoughts but , ﬁrst things ﬁrst , united needed to be dining from european
football ’s top table again . louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning

man united into champions league . wayne rooney smashes home during manchester united ’s

3-1 win over aston villa on saturday . united ’s win over aston villa took them third , eight

points ahead of ﬁfth-placed liverpool in the table . april 12 manchester city ( h ) . april 18

chelsea ( a ) . april 26 everton ( a ) . may 2 west bromwich albion ( h ) . may 9 crystal

palace ( a ) . may 17 arsenal ( h ) . may 24 hull city ( a ) . one season out of the champions

league was far from ideal , but two seasons would be an absolute disaster and something , he

understood , that would not be tolerated . in november , even that was looking optimistic . a

1-0 defeat to manchester city meant that united had taken just 13 points from their opening 10

matches - it was their worst start to a league campaign since 1986 , when ron atkinson only

lasted until november .

Reference Summary:
man united have an eight-point cushion from ﬁfth-place liverpool .
van gaal looks likely to deliver on his promise of top four ﬁnish .
but the dutchman has a three-year vision mapped out .
next season will have to see united mount sustained challenge for title .
they must also reach the later stages of the champions league .

Baseline:
manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old trafford on saturday .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his UNK aim of returning man united into the premier league top
four .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his UNK aim of returning man united into champions league .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions league.
united ’s win over aston villa took them third , eight points ahead of ﬁfth-placed liverpool in the table .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions league.

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old trafford on saturday .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions

league .

united needed to be dining from european football ’s top table again .

Figure 10: In this example, both our baseline model and ﬁnal model produce a completely abstractive
ﬁrst sentence, using a novel word beat.

Article (truncated): having been on the receiving end of a 6-1 thumping , a defeat like that

could be justiﬁably met with a backlash by angry supporters . watching a 3-1 ﬁrst leg aggregate

advantage turn into a 7-4 deﬁcit come the end of the reverse encounter too could send many
fans apoplectic at

the capitulation of their side . however that does n’t appear the case for

those devoted to porto . porto supporters gave their team a hero ’s welcome following their

6-1 defeat at bayern munich on tuesday . porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many
players to look perplexed by their warm reception . porto boss julen lopetegui ( left ) was

hugged by fans congratulating him on their champions league run . police escorts were needed

to keep the delirious supporters at bay as the porto team bus drove past . the team bus was met

with a cacophony of noise from porto supporters proudly chanting about their club . on their

return from a humiliating champions league quarter-ﬁnal loss at the hands of bayern munich on

tuesday night , the squad were given a heroes reception as they arrived back in portugal . in the

early hours of wednesday morning , fans mobbed the squad congratulating them on their run
in the tournament . star striker jackson martinez and ricardo quaresma were one of many porto

players who looked perplexed as they were hugged by fans before they making their way on to
the team bus - set upon a cacophony of ﬁercely-proud chanting . it was the ﬁrst time that porto

, who had been unbeaten in this season ’s tournament up until tuesday night , had reached the

quarter-ﬁnals of the champions league since the 2008-09 season .

Reference Summary:
bayern munich beat porto 6-1 in their champions league tie on tuesday .
result saw bayern win quarter-ﬁnal encounter 7-4 on aggregate .
it was the ﬁrst-time porto had reached that stage since the 2008-09 season .

Baseline:
porto beat bayern munich 2-0 in the champions league on tuesday night .
porto star james UNK was one of many players involved in the match .
the squad were given a trophy as they arrived back in portugal .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm

porto boss julen lopetegui was hugged by fans congratulating him on their champions league

reception .

run .

however that does n’t appear the case for those devoted to porto .

police escorts were needed to keep the delirious supporters at bay .

Figure 11: The baseline model makes several factual inaccuracies: it claims porto beat bayern munich
not vice versa, the score is changed from 7-4 to 2-0, jackson is changed to james and a heroes reception
is replaced with a trophy. Our ﬁnal model produces sentences that are individually accurate, but they
do not make sense as a whole. Note that the ﬁnal model omits the parenthesized phrase ( left ) from its
second sentence.

Article:
( cnn ) ” it ’s showtime ! ” michael keaton paid homage – ever so slightly – to
his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third turn hosting “ saturday night live ”

this weekend . keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since

he ﬁrst hosted the comedy sketch show in 1982 . “ i had a baby – he ’s 31 . i also have

a new girlfriend – she ’s 28 , ” he said . fans who were hoping for a full-blown revival of

keaton ’s most memorable characters might have been a little disappointed . snl cast members
taran killam and bobby moynihan begged the actor with a song to “ play ” batman and
beetlejuice with them . all they got in response were a couple of one-liners . overall , keaton

’s performance drew high marks from viewers and critics for its “ deadpan ” manner and “
unpredictable weirdness , ” in the words of a.v . club ’s dennis perkins . fans also delighted
in a cameo from “ walking dead ” star norman reedus during weekend update . keaton scored

some laughs from the audience as an ad executive who ’s not very good at his job , a confused

grandfather and a high school teacher who gets asked to the prom in a riff on the romantic
comedy “ she ’s all that . ” other crowd-pleasing spots included a scientology parody music
video and a news conference spooﬁng the ncaa student-athlete debate . the show also poked fun

at cnn with cast member cecily strong playing anchor brooke baldwin . baldwin said on twitter

that she ’s taking it as a “ crazy compliment ” and shared a clip from the skit .

Reference Summary:
michael keaton hosted “ saturday night live ” for the ﬁrst time in 1982 .
in 2015 , his nods to starring roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” are brief .

Baseline:
“ snl ” wins “ saturday night live ” .
keaton acknowledged in his opening “ saturday night live ” .
keaton acknowledged in his opening night ’s “ UNK ” .
the show also pokes fun at cnn with cast member mariah carey .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
“ beetlejuice ” michael keaton paid homage to his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third
turn hosting “ saturday night live ” this weekend .
keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since he ﬁrst hosted the comedy
sketch show in 1982 .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
michael keaton paid homage to his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third turn

hosting “ saturday night live ” .

comedy sketch show in 1982 .

keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since he ﬁrst hosted the

Figure 12: Baseline model replaces cecily strong with mariah carey, and produces generally nonsensical
output. The baseline model may be struggling with the out-of-vocabulary word beetlejuice, or perhaps
the unusual non-news format of the article. Note that the ﬁnal model omits – ever so slightly – from its
ﬁrst sentence.

Article (truncated): they are supposed to be the dream team who can solve the conundrum

of how to win the election . but david cameron and boris johnson were left scratching their

heads today as they struggled with a children ’s jigsaw teaching toddlers about

the seasons

. as the london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands , the prime

minister tried out what could be a new election slogan , telling him : ’ if in doubt , wedge it

in . ’ after being put right by a four-year-old who spotted their errors , the pair had more fun

ﬁnger painting with tory blue paint . david cameron and boris johnson were left stumped by
the puzzle at advantage children ’s day nursery in surbiton , as three-year-old stephanie looked

on . when they tried to put the puzzle back together , they hit trouble after it proved to be

more difﬁcult than expected . the conservative duo made their ﬁrst appearance together on the
campaign trail with a visit to advantage day nursery in surbiton , south west london . they were

supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare for 600,000 children aged three

and four . they sat at a table with joshua and stephanie , both aged three , and four-year-olds

hamish and leo where they broke up a puzzle which depicted the four seasons . when they tried

to put it back together , they hit trouble after it proved to be more difﬁcult than expected .

Reference Summary:
david cameron and boris johnson visit nursery to promote childcare .
duo left ﬂummoxed by jigsaw aimed at teaching children about seasons .
london mayor resorted to brute force to hammer wrong pieces together .
prime minister gave his approval , telling boris : ’ if in doubt , wedge it in ’ .

Baseline:
david cameron and boris johnson were left mystiﬁed by the puzzle .
they were at the nursery in UNK to promote a tory pledge to double free childcare for 25 children aged
three and four .
the pair were at the nursery in UNK to promote a tory pledge to double free childcare for children aged
three and four .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands .

prime minister tried out what could be a new election slogan .

but they hit trouble after it proved to be more difﬁcult than expected .

Figure 13: The baseline model appropriately replaces stumped with novel word mystiﬁed. However, the
reference summary chooses ﬂummoxed (also novel) so the choice of mystiﬁed is not rewarded by the
ROUGE metric. The baseline model also incorrectly substitutes 600,000 for 25. In the ﬁnal model’s
output we observe that the generation probability is largest at the beginning of sentences (especially the
ﬁrst verb) and on periods.

Article (truncated):
muhammadu buhari

lagos , nigeria ( cnn ) a day after winning nigeria ’s presidency ,

that he plans to aggressively ﬁght
corruption that has long plagued nigeria and go after the root of the nation ’s unrest . buhari

told cnn ’s christiane amanpour

said he ’ll “ rapidly give attention ” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria

, where the terrorist group boko haram operates . by cooperating with neighboring nations

chad , cameroon and niger , he said his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart

criminals and others contributing to nigeria ’s instability . for the ﬁrst time in nigeria ’s history
, the opposition defeated the ruling party in democratic elections . buhari defeated incumbent

goodluck jonathan by about 2 million votes , according to nigeria ’s independent national

electoral commission . the win comes after a long history of military rule , coups and botched

attempts at democracy in africa ’s most populous nation .

Reference Summary:
muhammadu buhari tells cnn ’s christiane amanpour that he will ﬁght corruption in nigeria .
nigeria is the most populous country in africa and is grappling with violent boko haram extremists .
nigeria is also africa ’s biggest economy , but up to 70 % of nigerians live on less than a dollar a day .

Baseline:
UNK UNK says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to destabilize nigeria ’s economy .
UNK says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals and other nigerians .
he says the country has long nigeria and nigeria ’s economy .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption in the northeast part of nigeria .
he says he ’ll “ rapidly give attention ” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria .
he says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria

.

he says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals .

the win comes after a long history of military rule , coups and botched attempts at democracy

in africa ’s most populous nation .

Figure 14: The baseline model incorrectly changes thwart criminals and others contributing to nigeria’s
instability to destabilize nigeria’s economy – which has a mostly opposite meaning. It also produces a
nonsensical sentence. Note that our ﬁnal model produces the novel word says to paraphrase told cnn ‘s
christiane amanpour.

Article: cairo ( cnn ) at least 12 people were killed sunday , and more injured , in separate

attacks on a police station , a checkpoint and along a highway in egypt ’s northern sinai

,

authorities said . six people , including one civilian , were killed when a car bomb exploded
near the police station in al-arish , capital of north sinai , health ministry spokesman hossam
abdel-ghafar told ahram online . he said 40 people were injured . ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis

afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack , which came hours after another operation that
the group also claimed . in that earlier attack , a ﬁrst lieutenant , a sergeant and four conscripts
were killed when their armored vehicle was attacked on the highway from al-arish to sheikh
zuweid in northern sinai , the military said . two other soldiers were injured and taken to a
military hospital . ansar beit al-maqdis has claimed many attacks against the army and police

in sinai . a third attack sunday on a checkpoint in rafah left three security personnel injured

, after unknown assailants opened ﬁre at them , according to state media . the attacks come

as the military announced a reshufﬂe of several senior military positions , state media reported

. among those being replaced are the generals in charge of military intelligence and egypt ’s

second ﬁeld army , which is spearheading the battle against the insurgents in the northern sinai

. egypt ’s army has been ﬁghting a decade-long militant islamist insurgency , which has spiked

since the ouster of muslim brotherhood president mohamed morsy in the summer of 2013 .

hundreds of police and soldiers , as well as civilians , have been killed in militant attacks in

the past months . ian lee reported from cairo . anas hamdan reported from atlanta .

Reference Summary:
six people , including one civilian , are killed when a car bomb explodes near a police station .
six others are killed when their armored vehicle is attacked on a highway in northern sinai .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claims responsibility .

Baseline:
he says the attacks come after another operation that killed 12 .
the attacks come as military announced a u.n. peacekeeping force in northern sinai .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .
the attacks come as the military announced a reshufﬂe of several senior military positions .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
six people ,

including one civilian , were killed when a car bomb explodes near the police

station .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .

egypt ’s army has been ﬁghting a decade-long militant islamist insurgency .

Figure 15: The baseline model fabricates a completely false detail about a u.n. peacekeeping force that
is not mentioned in the article. This is most likely inspired by a connection between U.N. peacekeeping
forces and northern sinai in the training data. The pointer-generator model is more accurate, correctly
reporting the reshufﬂe of several senior military positions.

Get To The Point: Summarization with Pointer-Generator Networks

Abigail See
Stanford University
abisee@stanford.edu

Peter J. Liu
Google Brain
peterjliu@google.com

Christopher D. Manning
Stanford University
manning@stanford.edu

7
1
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
2
 
 
]
L
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
2
v
8
6
3
4
0
.
4
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Neural sequence-to-sequence models have
provided a viable new approach for ab-
stractive text summarization (meaning
they are not restricted to simply selecting
and rearranging passages from the origi-
nal text). However, these models have two
shortcomings: they are liable to reproduce
factual details inaccurately, and they tend
to repeat themselves. In this work we pro-
pose a novel architecture that augments the
standard sequence-to-sequence attentional
model in two orthogonal ways.
First,
we use a hybrid pointer-generator network
that can copy words from the source text
via pointing, which aids accurate repro-
duction of information, while retaining the
ability to produce novel words through the
generator. Second, we use coverage to
keep track of what has been summarized,
which discourages repetition. We apply
our model to the CNN / Daily Mail sum-
marization task, outperforming the current
abstractive state-of-the-art by at least 2
ROUGE points.

Original Text (truncated): lagos, nigeria (cnn) a day after winning nige-
ria’s presidency, muhammadu buhari told cnn’s christiane amanpour that
he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria
and go after the root of the nation’s unrest. buhari said he’ll “rapidly give
attention” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria, where the ter-
rorist group boko haram operates. by cooperating with neighboring nations
chad, cameroon and niger, he said his administration is conﬁdent it will
be able to thwart criminals and others contributing to nigeria’s instability.
for the ﬁrst time in nigeria’s history, the opposition defeated the ruling party
in democratic elections. buhari defeated incumbent goodluck jonathan by
about 2 million votes, according to nigeria’s independent national electoral
commission. the win comes after a long history of military rule, coups
and botched attempts at democracy in africa’s most populous nation.

Baseline Seq2Seq + Attention: UNK UNK says his administration is conﬁ-
dent it will be able to destabilize nigeria’s economy. UNK says his admin-
istration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals and other nigerians.
he says the country has long nigeria and nigeria’s economy.

Pointer-Gen: muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght cor-
ruption in the northeast part of nigeria. he says he’ll “rapidly give at-
tention” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria. he says his
administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals.

Pointer-Gen + Coverage: muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively
ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria. he says his administration is
conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals. the win comes after a long his-
tory of military rule, coups and botched attempts at democracy in africa’s
most populous nation.

Figure 1: Comparison of output of 3 abstrac-
tive summarization models on a news article. The
baseline model makes factual errors, a nonsen-
sical sentence and struggles with OOV words
muhammadu buhari. The pointer-generator model
is accurate but repeats itself. Coverage eliminates
repetition. The ﬁnal summary is composed from
several fragments.

1

Introduction

Summarization is the task of condensing a piece of
text to a shorter version that contains the main in-
formation from the original. There are two broad
approaches to summarization: extractive and ab-
stractive. Extractive methods assemble summaries
exclusively from passages (usually whole sen-
tences) taken directly from the source text, while
abstractive methods may generate novel words
and phrases not featured in the source text – as
a human-written abstract usually does. The ex-
tractive approach is easier, because copying large

chunks of text from the source document ensures
baseline levels of grammaticality and accuracy.
On the other hand, sophisticated abilities that are
crucial to high-quality summarization, such as
paraphrasing, generalization, or the incorporation
of real-world knowledge, are possible only in an
abstractive framework (see Figure 5).

Due to the difﬁculty of abstractive summariza-
tion, the great majority of past work has been ex-
tractive (Kupiec et al., 1995; Paice, 1990; Sag-
gion and Poibeau, 2013). However, the recent suc-
cess of sequence-to-sequence models (Sutskever

Figure 2: Baseline sequence-to-sequence model with attention. The model may attend to relevant words
in the source text to generate novel words, e.g., to produce the novel word beat in the abstractive summary
Germany beat Argentina 2-0 the model may attend to the words victorious and win in the source text.

et al., 2014), in which recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) both read and freely generate text, has
made abstractive summarization viable (Chopra
et al., 2016; Nallapati et al., 2016; Rush et al.,
2015; Zeng et al., 2016). Though these systems
are promising, they exhibit undesirable behavior
such as inaccurately reproducing factual details,
an inability to deal with out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
words, and repeating themselves (see Figure 1).

In this paper we present an architecture that
addresses these three issues in the context of
multi-sentence summaries. While most recent ab-
stractive work has focused on headline genera-
tion tasks (reducing one or two sentences to a
single headline), we believe that longer-text sum-
marization is both more challenging (requiring
higher levels of abstraction while avoiding repe-
tition) and ultimately more useful. Therefore we
apply our model to the recently-introduced CNN/
Daily Mail dataset (Hermann et al., 2015; Nallap-
ati et al., 2016), which contains news articles (39
sentences on average) paired with multi-sentence
summaries, and show that we outperform the state-
of-the-art abstractive system by at least 2 ROUGE
points.

Our hybrid pointer-generator network facili-
tates copying words from the source text via point-
ing (Vinyals et al., 2015), which improves accu-
racy and handling of OOV words, while retaining
the ability to generate new words. The network,
which can be viewed as a balance between extrac-
tive and abstractive approaches, is similar to Gu
et al.’s (2016) CopyNet and Miao and Blunsom’s
(2016) Forced-Attention Sentence Compression,

that were applied to short-text summarization. We
propose a novel variant of the coverage vector (Tu
et al., 2016) from Neural Machine Translation,
which we use to track and control coverage of the
source document. We show that coverage is re-
markably effective for eliminating repetition.

2 Our Models

In this section we describe (1) our baseline
(2) our pointer-
sequence-to-sequence model,
generator model, and (3) our coverage mechanism
that can be added to either of the ﬁrst two models.
The code for our models is available online.1

2.1 Sequence-to-sequence attentional model

Our baseline model is similar to that of Nallapati
et al. (2016), and is depicted in Figure 2. The to-
kens of the article wi are fed one-by-one into the
encoder (a single-layer bidirectional LSTM), pro-
ducing a sequence of encoder hidden states hi. On
each step t, the decoder (a single-layer unidirec-
tional LSTM) receives the word embedding of the
previous word (while training, this is the previous
word of the reference summary; at test time it is
the previous word emitted by the decoder), and
has decoder state st. The attention distribution at
is calculated as in Bahdanau et al. (2015):

et
i = vT tanh(Whhi +Wsst + battn)
at = softmax(et)

(1)

(2)

where v, Wh, Ws and battn are learnable parame-
ters. The attention distribution can be viewed as

1www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

Figure 3: Pointer-generator model. For each decoder timestep a generation probability pgen ∈ [0, 1] is
calculated, which weights the probability of generating words from the vocabulary, versus copying words
from the source text. The vocabulary distribution and the attention distribution are weighted and summed
to obtain the ﬁnal distribution, from which we make our prediction. Note that out-of-vocabulary article
words such as 2-0 are included in the ﬁnal distribution. Best viewed in color.

a probability distribution over the source words,
that tells the decoder where to look to produce the
next word. Next, the attention distribution is used
to produce a weighted sum of the encoder hidden
states, known as the context vector h∗
t :
t = ∑i at
h∗
The context vector, which can be seen as a ﬁxed-
size representation of what has been read from the
source for this step, is concatenated with the de-
coder state st and fed through two linear layers to
produce the vocabulary distribution Pvocab:
t ] + b) + b(cid:48))

Pvocab = softmax(V (cid:48)(V [st, h∗

ihi

(4)

(3)

where V , V (cid:48), b and b(cid:48) are learnable parameters.
Pvocab is a probability distribution over all words
in the vocabulary, and provides us with our ﬁnal
distribution from which to predict words w:

P(w) = Pvocab(w)

During training, the loss for timestep t is the neg-
ative log likelihood of the target word w∗
t for that
timestep:

losst = − log P(w∗
t )
and the overall loss for the whole sequence is:

(5)

(6)

(7)

loss =

1

T ∑T

t=0 losst

2.2 Pointer-generator network

Our pointer-generator network is a hybrid between
our baseline and a pointer network (Vinyals et al.,
2015), as it allows both copying words via point-
ing, and generating words from a ﬁxed vocabulary.
In the pointer-generator model (depicted in Figure
3) the attention distribution at and context vector
h∗
t are calculated as in section 2.1. In addition, the
generation probability pgen ∈ [0, 1] for timestep t is
calculated from the context vector h∗
t , the decoder
state st and the decoder input xt:

(8)

h∗h∗

s st + wT

x xt + bptr)

pgen = σ (wT

t + wT
where vectors wh∗, ws, wx and scalar bptr are learn-
able parameters and σ is the sigmoid function.
Next, pgen is used as a soft switch to choose be-
tween generating a word from the vocabulary by
sampling from Pvocab, or copying a word from the
input sequence by sampling from the attention dis-
tribution at. For each document let the extended
vocabulary denote the union of the vocabulary,
and all words appearing in the source document.
We obtain the following probability distribution
over the extended vocabulary:
P(w) = pgenPvocab(w) + (1 − pgen)∑i:wi=w at
Note that if w is an out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
word, then Pvocab(w) is zero; similarly if w does

i (9)

not appear in the source document, then ∑i:wi=w at
i
is zero. The ability to produce OOV words is
one of the primary advantages of pointer-generator
models; by contrast models such as our baseline
are restricted to their pre-set vocabulary.

The loss function is as described in equations
(6) and (7), but with respect to our modiﬁed prob-
ability distribution P(w) given in equation (9).

Our loss function is more ﬂexible: because sum-
marization should not require uniform coverage,
we only penalize the overlap between each atten-
tion distribution and the coverage so far – prevent-
ing repeated attention. Finally, the coverage loss,
reweighted by some hyperparameter λ , is added to
the primary loss function to yield a new composite
loss function:

2.3 Coverage mechanism

Repetition is a common problem for sequence-
to-sequence models (Tu et al., 2016; Mi et al.,
2016; Sankaran et al., 2016; Suzuki and Nagata,
2016), and is especially pronounced when gener-
ating multi-sentence text (see Figure 1). We adapt
the coverage model of Tu et al. (2016) to solve the
problem. In our coverage model, we maintain a
coverage vector ct, which is the sum of attention
distributions over all previous decoder timesteps:

t(cid:48)=0

at(cid:48)

(10)

ct = ∑t−1
Intuitively, ct is a (unnormalized) distribution over
the source document words that represents the de-
gree of coverage that those words have received
from the attention mechanism so far. Note that c0
is a zero vector, because on the ﬁrst timestep, none
of the source document has been covered.

The coverage vector is used as extra input to the

attention mechanism, changing equation (1) to:

i = vT tanh(Whhi +Wsst + wcct
et

i + battn)

(11)

where wc is a learnable parameter vector of same
length as v. This ensures that the attention mecha-
nism’s current decision (choosing where to attend
next) is informed by a reminder of its previous
decisions (summarized in ct). This should make
it easier for the attention mechanism to avoid re-
peatedly attending to the same locations, and thus
avoid generating repetitive text.

We ﬁnd it necessary (see section 5) to addition-
ally deﬁne a coverage loss to penalize repeatedly
attending to the same locations:

covlosst = ∑i min(at

i, ct
i)

(12)

Note that the coverage loss is bounded; in particu-
lar covlosst ≤ ∑i at
i = 1. Equation (12) differs from
the coverage loss used in Machine Translation. In
MT, we assume that there should be a roughly one-
to-one translation ratio; accordingly the ﬁnal cov-
erage vector is penalized if it is more or less than 1.

losst = − log P(w∗

t ) + λ ∑i min(at

i, ct
i)

(13)

3 Related Work

Neural abstractive summarization. Rush et al.
(2015) were the ﬁrst to apply modern neural net-
works to abstractive text summarization, achiev-
ing state-of-the-art performance on DUC-2004
and Gigaword, two sentence-level summarization
datasets. Their approach, which is centered on the
attention mechanism, has been augmented with re-
current decoders (Chopra et al., 2016), Abstract
Meaning Representations (Takase et al., 2016), hi-
erarchical networks (Nallapati et al., 2016), vari-
ational autoencoders (Miao and Blunsom, 2016),
and direct optimization of the performance metric
(Ranzato et al., 2016), further improving perfor-
mance on those datasets.

However, large-scale datasets for summariza-
tion of longer text are rare. Nallapati et al. (2016)
adapted the DeepMind question-answering dataset
(Hermann et al., 2015) for summarization, result-
ing in the CNN/Daily Mail dataset, and provided
the ﬁrst abstractive baselines. The same authors
then published a neural extractive approach (Nal-
lapati et al., 2017), which uses hierarchical RNNs
to select sentences, and found that it signiﬁcantly
outperformed their abstractive result with respect
to the ROUGE metric. To our knowledge, these
are the only two published results on the full data-
set.

Prior to modern neural methods, abstractive
summarization received less attention than extrac-
tive summarization, but Jing (2000) explored cut-
ting unimportant parts of sentences to create sum-
maries, and Cheung and Penn (2014) explore sen-
tence fusion using dependency trees.

Pointer-generator networks. The pointer net-
work (Vinyals et al., 2015) is a sequence-to-
sequence model that uses the soft attention dis-
tribution of Bahdanau et al.
(2015) to produce
an output sequence consisting of elements from

the input sequence. The pointer network has been
used to create hybrid approaches for NMT (Gul-
cehre et al., 2016), language modeling (Merity
et al., 2016), and summarization (Gu et al., 2016;
Gulcehre et al., 2016; Miao and Blunsom, 2016;
Nallapati et al., 2016; Zeng et al., 2016).

Our approach is close to the Forced-Attention
Sentence Compression model of Miao and Blun-
som (2016) and the CopyNet model of Gu et al.
(2016), with some small differences: (i) We cal-
culate an explicit switch probability pgen, whereas
Gu et al. induce competition through a shared soft-
max function. (ii) We recycle the attention distri-
bution to serve as the copy distribution, but Gu et
al. use two separate distributions.
(iii) When a
word appears multiple times in the source text, we
sum probability mass from all corresponding parts
of the attention distribution, whereas Miao and
Blunsom do not. Our reasoning is that (i) calcu-
lating an explicit pgen usefully enables us to raise
or lower the probability of all generated words or
all copy words at once, rather than individually,
(ii) the two distributions serve such similar pur-
poses that we ﬁnd our simpler approach sufﬁces,
and (iii) we observe that the pointer mechanism
often copies a word while attending to multiple oc-
currences of it in the source text.

Our approach is considerably different from
that of Gulcehre et al. (2016) and Nallapati et al.
(2016). Those works train their pointer compo-
nents to activate only for out-of-vocabulary words
or named entities (whereas we allow our model to
freely learn when to use the pointer), and they do
not mix the probabilities from the copy distribu-
tion and the vocabulary distribution. We believe
the mixture approach described here is better for
abstractive summarization – in section 6 we show
that the copy mechanism is vital for accurately
reproducing rare but in-vocabulary words, and in
section 7.2 we observe that the mixture model en-
ables the language model and copy mechanism to
work together to perform abstractive copying.

Coverage. Originating from Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (Koehn, 2009), coverage was
adapted for NMT by Tu et al. (2016) and Mi et al.
(2016), who both use a GRU to update the cov-
erage vector each step. We ﬁnd that a simpler
approach – summing the attention distributions to
obtain the coverage vector – sufﬁces. In this re-
spect our approach is similar to Xu et al. (2015),
who apply a coverage-like method to image cap-

tioning, and Chen et al. (2016), who also incorpo-
rate a coverage mechanism (which they call ‘dis-
traction’) as described in equation (11) into neural
summarization of longer text.

Temporal attention is a related technique that
has been applied to NMT (Sankaran et al., 2016)
and summarization (Nallapati et al., 2016).
In
this approach, each attention distribution is di-
vided by the sum of the previous, which effec-
tively dampens repeated attention. We tried this
method but found it too destructive, distorting the
signal from the attention mechanism and reducing
performance. We hypothesize that an early inter-
vention method such as coverage is preferable to
a post hoc method such as temporal attention – it
is better to inform the attention mechanism to help
it make better decisions, than to override its de-
cisions altogether. This theory is supported by the
large boost that coverage gives our ROUGE scores
(see Table 1), compared to the smaller boost given
by temporal attention for the same task (Nallapati
et al., 2016).

4 Dataset

We use the CNN/Daily Mail dataset (Hermann
et al., 2015; Nallapati et al., 2016), which con-
tains online news articles (781 tokens on average)
paired with multi-sentence summaries (3.75 sen-
tences or 56 tokens on average). We used scripts
supplied by Nallapati et al. (2016) to obtain the
same version of the the data, which has 287,226
training pairs, 13,368 validation pairs and 11,490
test pairs. Both the dataset’s published results
(Nallapati et al., 2016, 2017) use the anonymized
version of the data, which has been pre-processed
to replace each named entity, e.g., The United Na-
tions, with its own unique identiﬁer for the exam-
ple pair, e.g., @entity5. By contrast, we operate
directly on the original text (or non-anonymized
version of the data),2 which we believe is the fa-
vorable problem to solve because it requires no
pre-processing.

5 Experiments

all

experiments,

our model has 256-
For
dimensional hidden states and 128-dimensional
word embeddings. For the pointer-generator mod-
els, we use a vocabulary of 50k words for both
source and target – note that due to the pointer net-
work’s ability to handle OOV words, we can use

2at www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

METEOR
exact match + stem/syn/para

abstractive model (Nallapati et al., 2016)*
seq-to-seq + attn baseline (150k vocab)
seq-to-seq + attn baseline (50k vocab)
pointer-generator
pointer-generator + coverage
lead-3 baseline (ours)
lead-3 baseline (Nallapati et al., 2017)*
extractive model (Nallapati et al., 2017)*

ROUGE
2
13.30
11.17
11.81
15.66
17.28
17.70
15.7
16.2

L
32.65
28.08
28.83
33.42
36.38
36.57
35.5
35.3

1
35.46
30.49
31.33
36.44
39.53
40.34
39.2
39.6

-
11.65
12.03
15.35
17.32
20.48
-
-

-
12.86
13.20
16.65
18.72
22.21
-
-

Table 1: ROUGE F1 and METEOR scores on the test set. Models and baselines in the top half are
abstractive, while those in the bottom half are extractive. Those marked with * were trained and evaluated
on the anonymized dataset, and so are not strictly comparable to our results on the original text. All our
ROUGE scores have a 95% conﬁdence interval of at most ±0.25 as reported by the ofﬁcial ROUGE
script. The METEOR improvement from the 50k baseline to the pointer-generator model, and from the
pointer-generator to the pointer-generator+coverage model, were both found to be statistically signiﬁcant
using an approximate randomization test with p < 0.01.

a smaller vocabulary size than Nallapati et al.’s
(2016) 150k source and 60k target vocabularies.
For the baseline model, we also try a larger vocab-
ulary size of 150k.

Note that the pointer and the coverage mecha-
nism introduce very few additional parameters to
the network: for the models with vocabulary size
50k, the baseline model has 21,499,600 parame-
ters, the pointer-generator adds 1153 extra param-
eters (wh∗, ws, wx and bptr in equation 8), and cov-
erage adds 512 extra parameters (wc in equation
11).

Unlike Nallapati et al. (2016), we do not pre-
train the word embeddings – they are learned
from scratch during training. We train using Ada-
grad (Duchi et al., 2011) with learning rate 0.15
and an initial accumulator value of 0.1.
(This
was found to work best of Stochastic Gradient
Descent, Adadelta, Momentum, Adam and RM-
SProp). We use gradient clipping with a maximum
gradient norm of 2, but do not use any form of reg-
ularization. We use loss on the validation set to
implement early stopping.

During training and at test time we truncate the
article to 400 tokens and limit the length of the
summary to 100 tokens for training and 120 to-
kens at test time.3 This is done to expedite train-
ing and testing, but we also found that truncating
the article can raise the performance of the model

3The upper limit of 120 is mostly invisible:

the beam
search algorithm is self-stopping and almost never reaches
the 120th step.

(see section 7.1 for more details). For training,
we found it efﬁcient to start with highly-truncated
sequences, then raise the maximum length once
converged. We train on a single Tesla K40m GPU
with a batch size of 16. At test time our summaries
are produced using beam search with beam size 4.

We trained both our baseline models for about
600,000 iterations (33 epochs) – this is similar
to the 35 epochs required by Nallapati et al.’s
(2016) best model. Training took 4 days and 14
hours for the 50k vocabulary model, and 8 days 21
hours for the 150k vocabulary model. We found
the pointer-generator model quicker to train, re-
quiring less than 230,000 training iterations (12.8
In par-
epochs); a total of 3 days and 4 hours.
ticular, the pointer-generator model makes much
quicker progress in the early phases of training.
To obtain our ﬁnal coverage model, we added the
coverage mechanism with coverage loss weighted
to λ = 1 (as described in equation 13), and trained
for a further 3000 iterations (about 2 hours).
In
this time the coverage loss converged to about 0.2,
down from an initial value of about 0.5. We also
tried a more aggressive value of λ = 2; this re-
duced coverage loss but increased the primary loss
function, thus we did not use it.

We tried training the coverage model without
the loss function, hoping that the attention mech-
anism may learn by itself not to attend repeatedly
to the same locations, but we found this to be inef-
fective, with no discernible reduction in repetition.
We also tried training with coverage from the ﬁrst

iteration rather than as a separate training phase,
but found that in the early phase of training, the
coverage objective interfered with the main objec-
tive, reducing overall performance.

6 Results

6.1 Preliminaries

Our results are given in Table 1. We evalu-
ate our models with the standard ROUGE metric
(Lin, 2004b), reporting the F1 scores for ROUGE-
1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L (which respectively
measure the word-overlap, bigram-overlap, and
longest common sequence between the reference
summary and the summary to be evaluated). We
obtain our ROUGE scores using the pyrouge
package.4 We also evaluate with the METEOR
metric (Denkowski and Lavie, 2014), both in ex-
act match mode (rewarding only exact matches
between words) and full mode (which addition-
ally rewards matching stems, synonyms and para-
phrases).5

In addition to our own models, we also report
the lead-3 baseline (which uses the ﬁrst three sen-
tences of the article as a summary), and compare
to the only existing abstractive (Nallapati et al.,
2016) and extractive (Nallapati et al., 2017) mod-
els on the full dataset. The output of our models is
available online.6

Given that we generate plain-text summaries but
Nallapati et al. (2016; 2017) generate anonymized
summaries (see Section 4), our ROUGE scores
are not strictly comparable. There is evidence
to suggest that the original-text dataset may re-
sult in higher ROUGE scores in general than the
anonymized dataset – the lead-3 baseline is higher
on the former than the latter. One possible expla-
nation is that multi-word named entities lead to
a higher rate of n-gram overlap. Unfortunately,
ROUGE is the only available means of compar-
ison with Nallapati et al.’s work. Nevertheless,
given that the disparity in the lead-3 scores is
(+1.1 ROUGE-1, +2.0 ROUGE-2, +1.1 ROUGE-
L) points respectively, and our best model scores
exceed Nallapati et al. (2016) by (+4.07 ROUGE-
1, +3.98 ROUGE-2, +3.73 ROUGE-L) points, we
may estimate that we outperform the only previous
abstractive system by at least 2 ROUGE points all-
round.

4pypi.python.org/pypi/pyrouge/0.1.3
5www.cs.cmu.edu/~alavie/METEOR
6www.github.com/abisee/pointer-generator

30

20

10

s
e
t
a
c
i
l
p
u
d

e
r
a

t
a
h
t

%

0
1 - g r a

m s

m s

2 - g r a

m s

3 - g r a

4 - g r a

m s

n t e

s e

e s

c

n

pointer-generator, no coverage
pointer-generator + coverage
reference summaries

Figure 4: Coverage eliminates undesirable repe-
tition. Summaries from our non-coverage model
contain many duplicated n-grams while our cover-
age model produces a similar number as the ref-
erence summaries.

6.2 Observations

We ﬁnd that both our baseline models perform
poorly with respect to ROUGE and METEOR, and
in fact the larger vocabulary size (150k) does not
seem to help. Even the better-performing baseline
(with 50k vocabulary) produces summaries with
several common problems. Factual details are fre-
quently reproduced incorrectly, often replacing an
uncommon (but in-vocabulary) word with a more-
common alternative. For example in Figure 1,
the baseline model appears to struggle with the
rare word thwart, producing destabilize instead,
which leads to the fabricated phrase destabilize
nigeria’s economy. Even more catastrophically,
the summaries sometimes devolve into repetitive
nonsense, such as the third sentence produced by
the baseline model in Figure 1.
In addition, the
baseline model can’t reproduce out-of-vocabulary
words (such as muhammadu buhari in Figure 1).
Further examples of all these problems are pro-
vided in the supplementary material.

Our pointer-generator model achieves much
better ROUGE and METEOR scores than the
baseline, despite many fewer training epochs. The
difference in the summaries is also marked: out-
of-vocabulary words are handled easily, factual
details are almost always copied correctly, and
there are no fabrications (see Figure 1). However,
repetition is still very common.

Our pointer-generator model with coverage im-
proves the ROUGE and METEOR scores further,
convincingly surpassing the best abstractive model

Article: smugglers lure arab and african migrants by offer-
ing discounts to get onto overcrowded ships if people bring
more potential passengers, a cnn investigation has revealed.
(...)
Summary: cnn investigation uncovers the business inside
a human smuggling ring.

Article: eyewitness video showing white north charleston
police ofﬁcer michael slager shooting to death an unarmed
black man has exposed discrepancies in the reports of the
ﬁrst ofﬁcers on the scene. (...)
Summary: more questions than answers emerge in con-
troversial s.c. police shooting.

Figure 5: Examples of highly abstractive reference
summaries (bold denotes novel words).

of Nallapati et al.
(2016) by several ROUGE
points. Despite the brevity of the coverage train-
ing phase (about 1% of the total training time),
the repetition problem is almost completely elimi-
nated, which can be seen both qualitatively (Figure
1) and quantitatively (Figure 4). However, our best
model does not quite surpass the ROUGE scores
of the lead-3 baseline, nor the current best extrac-
tive model (Nallapati et al., 2017). We discuss this
issue in section 7.1.

7 Discussion

7.1 Comparison with extractive systems

It is clear from Table 1 that extractive systems tend
to achieve higher ROUGE scores than abstractive,
and that the extractive lead-3 baseline is extremely
strong (even the best extractive system beats it by
only a small margin). We offer two possible ex-
planations for these observations.

Firstly, news articles tend to be structured with
the most important information at the start; this
partially explains the strength of the lead-3 base-
line. Indeed, we found that using only the ﬁrst 400
tokens (about 20 sentences) of the article yielded
signiﬁcantly higher ROUGE scores than using the
ﬁrst 800 tokens.

Secondly, the nature of the task and the ROUGE
metric make extractive approaches and the lead-
3 baseline difﬁcult to beat. The choice of con-
tent for the reference summaries is quite subjective
– sometimes the sentences form a self-contained
summary; other times they simply showcase a few
interesting details from the article. Given that the
articles contain 39 sentences on average, there are
many equally valid ways to choose 3 or 4 high-
lights in this style. Abstraction introduces even
more options (choice of phrasing), further decreas-

ing the likelihood of matching the reference sum-
mary. For example, smugglers proﬁt from des-
perate migrants is a valid alternative abstractive
summary for the ﬁrst example in Figure 5, but
it scores 0 ROUGE with respect to the reference
summary. This inﬂexibility of ROUGE is exac-
erbated by only having one reference summary,
which has been shown to lower ROUGE’s relia-
bility compared to multiple reference summaries
(Lin, 2004a).

Due to the subjectivity of the task and thus
the diversity of valid summaries, it seems that
ROUGE rewards safe strategies such as select-
ing the ﬁrst-appearing content, or preserving orig-
inal phrasing. While the reference summaries do
sometimes deviate from these techniques, those
deviations are unpredictable enough that the safer
strategy obtains higher ROUGE scores on average.
This may explain why extractive systems tend to
obtain higher ROUGE scores than abstractive, and
even extractive systems do not signiﬁcantly ex-
ceed the lead-3 baseline.

To explore this issue further, we evaluated our
systems with the METEOR metric, which rewards
not only exact word matches, but also matching
stems, synonyms and paraphrases (from a pre-
deﬁned list). We observe that all our models re-
ceive over 1 METEOR point boost by the inclu-
sion of stem, synonym and paraphrase matching,
indicating that they may be performing some ab-
straction. However, we again observe that the
lead-3 baseline is not surpassed by our models.
It may be that news article style makes the lead-
3 baseline very strong with respect to any metric.
We believe that investigating this issue further is
an important direction for future work.

7.2 How abstractive is our model?

We have shown that our pointer mechanism makes
our abstractive system more reliable, copying fac-
tual details correctly more often. But does the ease
of copying make our system any less abstractive?
Figure 6 shows that our ﬁnal model’s sum-
maries contain a much lower rate of novel n-grams
(i.e., those that don’t appear in the article) than the
reference summaries, indicating a lower degree of
abstraction. Note that the baseline model produces
novel n-grams more frequently – however, this
statistic includes all the incorrectly copied words,
UNK tokens and fabrications alongside the good
instances of abstraction.

l
e
v
o
n

e
r
a

t
a
h
t

%

100
80
60
40
20
0
1 - g r a

m s

m s

2 - g r a

m s

3 - g r a

4 - g r a

m s

n t e

s e

e s

c

n

pointer-generator + coverage
sequence-to-sequence + attention baseline
reference summaries

Figure 6: Although our best model is abstractive,
it does not produce novel n-grams (i.e., n-grams
that don’t appear in the source text) as often as
the reference summaries. The baseline model
produces more novel n-grams, but many of these
are erroneous (see section 7.2).

Article: andy murray (...) is into the semi-ﬁnals of the mi-
ami open , but not before getting a scare from 21 year-old
austrian dominic thiem, who pushed him to 4-4 in the sec-
ond set before going down 3-6 6-4, 6-1 in an hour and three
quarters. (...)
Summary: andy murray defeated dominic thiem 3-6 6-4,
6-1 in an hour and three quarters.

Article: (...) wayne rooney smashes home during manch-
ester united ’s 3-1 win over aston villa on saturday. (...)
Summary: manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old
trafford on saturday.

Figure 7: Examples of abstractive summaries pro-
duced by our model (bold denotes novel words).

In particular, Figure 6 shows that our ﬁnal
model copies whole article sentences 35% of the
time; by comparison the reference summaries do
so only 1.3% of the time. This is a main area for
improvement, as we would like our model to move
beyond simple sentence extraction. However, we
observe that the other 65% encompasses a range of
abstractive techniques. Article sentences are trun-
cated to form grammatically-correct shorter ver-
sions, and new sentences are composed by stitch-
ing together fragments. Unnecessary interjections,
clauses and parenthesized phrases are sometimes
omitted from copied passages. Some of these abil-
ities are demonstrated in Figure 1, and the supple-
mentary material contains more examples.

Figure 7 shows two examples of more impres-
sive abstraction – both with similar structure. The
dataset contains many sports stories whose sum-
maries follow the X beat Y (cid:104)score(cid:105) on (cid:104)day(cid:105) tem-

plate, which may explain why our model is most
conﬁdently abstractive on these examples. In gen-
eral however, our model does not routinely pro-
duce summaries like those in Figure 7, and is not
close to producing summaries like in Figure 5.

The value of the generation probability pgen
also gives a measure of the abstractiveness of our
model. During training, pgen starts with a value
of about 0.30 then increases, converging to about
0.53 by the end of training. This indicates that
the model ﬁrst learns to mostly copy, then learns
to generate about half the time. However at test
time, pgen is heavily skewed towards copying, with
a mean value of 0.17. The disparity is likely
due to the fact that during training, the model re-
ceives word-by-word supervision in the form of
the reference summary, but at test time it does
not. Nonetheless, the generator module is use-
ful even when the model is copying. We ﬁnd
that pgen is highest at times of uncertainty such
as the beginning of sentences, the join between
stitched-together fragments, and when producing
periods that truncate a copied sentence. Our mix-
ture model allows the network to copy while si-
multaneously consulting the language model – en-
abling operations like stitching and truncation to
In any case,
be performed with grammaticality.
encouraging the pointer-generator model to write
more abstractively, while retaining the accuracy
advantages of the pointer module, is an exciting
direction for future work.

8 Conclusion

In this work we presented a hybrid pointer-
generator architecture with coverage, and showed
that it reduces inaccuracies and repetition. We ap-
plied our model to a new and challenging long-
text dataset, and signiﬁcantly outperformed the
abstractive state-of-the-art result. Our model ex-
hibits many abstractive abilities, but attaining
higher levels of abstraction remains an open re-
search question.

9 Acknowledgment

We thank the ACL reviewers for their helpful com-
ments. This work was begun while the ﬁrst author
was an intern at Google Brain and continued at
Stanford. Stanford University gratefully acknowl-
edges the support of the DARPA DEFT Program
AFRL contract no. FA8750-13-2-0040. Any opin-
ions in this material are those of the authors alone.

References

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.

Qian Chen, Xiaodan Zhu, Zhenhua Ling, Si Wei, and
Hui Jiang. 2016. Distraction-based neural networks
In International Joint
for modeling documents.
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

Jackie Chi Kit Cheung and Gerald Penn. 2014. Unsu-
pervised sentence enhancement for automatic sum-
marization. In Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Alexander M Rush.
2016. Abstractive sentence summarization with at-
In North Amer-
tentive recurrent neural networks.
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2014. Meteor
universal: Language speciﬁc translation evaluation
In EACL 2014 Workshop
for any target language.
on Statistical Machine Translation.

John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. 2011.
Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning
Journal of Machine
and stochastic optimization.
Learning Research 12:2121–2159.

Jiatao Gu, Zhengdong Lu, Hang Li, and Victor OK
Incorporating copying mechanism in
In Association for

Li. 2016.
sequence-to-sequence learning.
Computational Linguistics.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004b. Rouge: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. In Text summariza-
tion branches out: ACL workshop.

Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and
Pointer sentinel mixture
Richard Socher. 2016.
In NIPS 2016 Workshop on Multi-class
models.
and Multi-label Learning in Extremely Large Label
Spaces.

Haitao Mi, Baskaran Sankaran, Zhiguo Wang, and Abe
Ittycheriah. 2016. Coverage embedding models for
neural machine translation. In Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing.

Yishu Miao and Phil Blunsom. 2016. Language as a
latent variable: Discrete generative models for sen-
tence compression. In Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing.

Ramesh Nallapati, Feifei Zhai, and Bowen Zhou. 2017.
SummaRuNNer: A recurrent neural network based
sequence model for extractive summarization of
documents. In Association for the Advancement of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Cicero dos Santos,
C¸ aglar Gulc¸ehre, and Bing Xiang. 2016. Abstrac-
tive text summarization using sequence-to-sequence
RNNs and beyond. In Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning.

Chris D Paice. 1990. Constructing literature abstracts
by computer: techniques and prospects. Information
Processing & Management 26(1):171–186.

Caglar Gulcehre, Sungjin Ahn, Ramesh Nallapati,
Bowen Zhou, and Yoshua Bengio. 2016. Pointing
In Association for Computa-
the unknown words.
tional Linguistics.

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli,
and Wojciech Zaremba. 2016. Sequence level train-
ing with recurrent neural networks. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.

Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward
Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Su-
leyman, and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching ma-
chines to read and comprehend. In Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems.

Hongyan Jing. 2000. Sentence reduction for automatic
In Applied natural language

text summarization.
processing.

Philipp Koehn. 2009. Statistical machine translation.

Cambridge University Press.

Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen, and Francine Chen. 1995.
A trainable document summarizer. In International
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004a.

Looking for a few good
metrics: Automatic summarization evaluation-how
In NACSIS/NII Test
many samples are enough?
Collection for Information Retrieval (NTCIR) Work-
shop.

Alexander M Rush, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston.
2015. A neural attention model for abstractive sen-
tence summarization. In Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing.

Horacio Saggion and Thierry Poibeau. 2013. Auto-
matic text summarization: Past, present and future.
In Multi-source, Multilingual Information Extrac-
tion and Summarization, Springer, pages 3–21.

Baskaran Sankaran, Haitao Mi, Yaser Al-Onaizan, and
Abe Ittycheriah. 2016. Temporal attention model
arXiv preprint
for neural machine translation.
arXiv:1608.02927 .

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Neural Information Processing Systems.

Jun Suzuki and Masaaki Nagata. 2016. RNN-based
encoder-decoder approach with word frequency es-
timation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.00138 .

Sho Takase, Jun Suzuki, Naoaki Okazaki, Tsutomu Hi-
rao, and Masaaki Nagata. 2016. Neural headline
generation on abstract meaning representation.
In
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing.

Zhaopeng Tu, Zhengdong Lu, Yang Liu, Xiaohua Liu,
and Hang Li. 2016. Modeling coverage for neural
In Association for Computa-
machine translation.
tional Linguistics.

Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly.
2015. Pointer networks. In Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems.

Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho,
Aaron C Courville, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Richard S
Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show, attend and
tell: Neural image caption generation with visual
attention. In International Conference on Machine
Learning.

Wenyuan Zeng, Wenjie Luo, Sanja Fidler, and Raquel
Efﬁcient summarization with
arXiv preprint

Urtasun. 2016.
read-again and copy mechanism.
arXiv:1611.03382 .

Supplementary Material

This appendix provides examples from the test set, with side-by-side comparisons of the reference sum-
maries and the summaries produced by our models. In each example:

• italics denote out-of-vocabulary words

• red denotes factual errors in the summaries

• green shading intensity represents the value of the generation probability pgen

• yellow shading intensity represents ﬁnal value of the coverage vector at the end of ﬁnal model’s

summarization process.

Article (truncated): andy murray came close to giving himself some extra preparation time for

his wedding next week before ensuring that he still has unﬁnished tennis business to attend to .

the world no 4 is into the semi-ﬁnals of the miami open , but not before getting a scare from
21 year-old austrian dominic thiem , who pushed him to 4-4 in the second set before going

down 3-6 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters . murray was awaiting the winner from the

last eight match between tomas berdych and argentina ’s juan monaco . prior to this tournament
thiem lost in the second round of a challenger event to soon-to-be new brit aljaz bedene . andy
murray pumps his ﬁrst after defeating dominic thiem to reach the miami open semi ﬁnals .
muray throws his sweatband into the crowd after completing a 3-6 , 6-4 , 6-1 victory in ﬂorida
. murray shakes hands with thiem who he described as a ’ strong guy ’ after the game . and

murray has a fairly simple message for any of his fellow british tennis players who might be

agitated about his imminent arrival into the home ranks : do n’t complain . instead the british no

1 believes his colleagues should use the assimilation of the world number 83 , originally from

slovenia , as motivation to better themselves .

Reference Summary:
british no 1 defeated dominic thiem in miami open quarter ﬁnals .
andy murray celebrated his 500th career win in the previous round .
third seed will play the winner of tomas berdych and juan monaco in the semi ﬁnals of the atp masters
1000 event in key biscayne .

Baseline:
andy murray beat UNK bedene 6-3 , 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters .
british no 1 believes his colleagues should use the maze of the world number 83 , originally from
slovenia , as motivation to better themselves .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
andy murray came close to giving himself some extra preparation for his wedding next week before
getting a scare from 21 year-old austrian dominic thiem .
the world no 4 is into the semi-ﬁnals of the miami open , but not before getting a scare from 21 year-old
austrian dominic thiem .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
andy murray defeated dominic thiem 3-6 6-4 , 6-1 in an hour and three quarters .

murray was awaiting the winner from the last eight match between tomas berdych and argentina

’s juan monaco .

prior to this tournament thiem lost in the second round of a challenger event to soon-to-be new
brit aljaz bedene .

Figure 8: The baseline model reports the wrong score 6-3, substitutes bedene for thiem and strug-
gles with the uncommon word assimilation. The pointer-network models accurately reproduce the out-
of-vocabulary words thiem and aljaz. Note that the ﬁnal model produces the novel word defeated to
incorporate several fragments into a single sentence.

Article (truncated): munster have signed new zealand international francis saili on a two-year
deal . utility back saili , who made his all blacks debut against argentina in 2013 , will move

to the province later this year after the completion of his 2015 contractual commitments . the
24-year-old currently plays for auckland-based super rugby side the blues and was part of the
new zealand under-20 side that won the junior world championship in italy in 2011 . saili ’s

signature is something of a coup for munster and head coach anthony foley believes he will
be a great addition to their backline . francis saili has signed a two-year deal to join munster

and will link up with them later this year . ’ we are really pleased that francis has committed

his future to the province , ’ foley told munster ’s ofﬁcial website . ’ he is a talented centre
with an impressive skill-set and he possesses the physical attributes to excel

in the northern

hemisphere . ’ i believe he will be a great addition to our backline and we look forward to
welcoming him to munster . ’ saili has been capped twice by new zealand and was part of the

under 20 side that won the junior championship in 2011 .

Reference Summary:
utility back francis saili will join up with munster later this year .
the new zealand international has signed a two-year contract .
saili made his debut for the all blacks against argentina in 2013 .

Baseline:
dutch international francis UNK has signed a two-year deal to join irish UNK super rugby side the
blues .
UNK ’s signature is something of a coup for munster and his head coach anthony foley believes he will
be a great addition to their respective prospects .
UNK has been capped twice by new zealand .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
new zealand international francis saili will move to the province later this year .
utility back saili made his all blacks debut against argentina in 2013 .
utility back saili will move to the province later this year .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
francis saili has signed a two-year deal to join munster later this year .

the 24-year-old was part of

the new zealand under-20 side that won the junior world

championship in italy in 2011 .
saili ’s signature is something of a coup for munster and head coach anthony foley .

Figure 9: The baseline model incorrectly substitutes dutch for new zealand (perhaps reﬂecting the Euro-
pean bias of the dataset), fabricates irish, and struggles with out-of-vocabulary words saili and auckland-
based. Though it is not clear why, the phrase addition to our backline is changed to the nonsensical
addition to their respective prospects. The pointer-generator model ﬁxes these accuracy problems, and
the addition of coverage ﬁxes the repetition problem. Note that the ﬁnal model skips over large passages
of text to produce shorter sentences.

Article (truncated): right from the moment he breezed through the doors at old trafford , louis

van gaal was a man with a plan . the ﬁrst season , he stated , would see him deliver manchester

united back into their rightful place in the champions league . he would restore them to the
premier league top four but loftier aims of silverware would have to wait . his three-year vision

would allow for such thoughts but , ﬁrst things ﬁrst , united needed to be dining from european
football ’s top table again . louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning

man united into champions league . wayne rooney smashes home during manchester united ’s

3-1 win over aston villa on saturday . united ’s win over aston villa took them third , eight

points ahead of ﬁfth-placed liverpool in the table . april 12 manchester city ( h ) . april 18

chelsea ( a ) . april 26 everton ( a ) . may 2 west bromwich albion ( h ) . may 9 crystal

palace ( a ) . may 17 arsenal ( h ) . may 24 hull city ( a ) . one season out of the champions

league was far from ideal , but two seasons would be an absolute disaster and something , he

understood , that would not be tolerated . in november , even that was looking optimistic . a

1-0 defeat to manchester city meant that united had taken just 13 points from their opening 10

matches - it was their worst start to a league campaign since 1986 , when ron atkinson only

lasted until november .

Reference Summary:
man united have an eight-point cushion from ﬁfth-place liverpool .
van gaal looks likely to deliver on his promise of top four ﬁnish .
but the dutchman has a three-year vision mapped out .
next season will have to see united mount sustained challenge for title .
they must also reach the later stages of the champions league .

Baseline:
manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old trafford on saturday .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his UNK aim of returning man united into the premier league top
four .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his UNK aim of returning man united into champions league .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions league.
united ’s win over aston villa took them third , eight points ahead of ﬁfth-placed liverpool in the table .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions league.

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
manchester united beat aston villa 3-1 at old trafford on saturday .
louis van gaal is close to delivering his ﬁrst-season aim of returning man united into champions

league .

united needed to be dining from european football ’s top table again .

Figure 10: In this example, both our baseline model and ﬁnal model produce a completely abstractive
ﬁrst sentence, using a novel word beat.

Article (truncated): having been on the receiving end of a 6-1 thumping , a defeat like that

could be justiﬁably met with a backlash by angry supporters . watching a 3-1 ﬁrst leg aggregate

advantage turn into a 7-4 deﬁcit come the end of the reverse encounter too could send many
fans apoplectic at

the capitulation of their side . however that does n’t appear the case for

those devoted to porto . porto supporters gave their team a hero ’s welcome following their

6-1 defeat at bayern munich on tuesday . porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many
players to look perplexed by their warm reception . porto boss julen lopetegui ( left ) was

hugged by fans congratulating him on their champions league run . police escorts were needed

to keep the delirious supporters at bay as the porto team bus drove past . the team bus was met

with a cacophony of noise from porto supporters proudly chanting about their club . on their

return from a humiliating champions league quarter-ﬁnal loss at the hands of bayern munich on

tuesday night , the squad were given a heroes reception as they arrived back in portugal . in the

early hours of wednesday morning , fans mobbed the squad congratulating them on their run
in the tournament . star striker jackson martinez and ricardo quaresma were one of many porto

players who looked perplexed as they were hugged by fans before they making their way on to
the team bus - set upon a cacophony of ﬁercely-proud chanting . it was the ﬁrst time that porto

, who had been unbeaten in this season ’s tournament up until tuesday night , had reached the

quarter-ﬁnals of the champions league since the 2008-09 season .

Reference Summary:
bayern munich beat porto 6-1 in their champions league tie on tuesday .
result saw bayern win quarter-ﬁnal encounter 7-4 on aggregate .
it was the ﬁrst-time porto had reached that stage since the 2008-09 season .

Baseline:
porto beat bayern munich 2-0 in the champions league on tuesday night .
porto star james UNK was one of many players involved in the match .
the squad were given a trophy as they arrived back in portugal .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm reception.

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
porto star striker jackson martinez was one of many players to look perplexed by their warm

porto boss julen lopetegui was hugged by fans congratulating him on their champions league

reception .

run .

however that does n’t appear the case for those devoted to porto .

police escorts were needed to keep the delirious supporters at bay .

Figure 11: The baseline model makes several factual inaccuracies: it claims porto beat bayern munich
not vice versa, the score is changed from 7-4 to 2-0, jackson is changed to james and a heroes reception
is replaced with a trophy. Our ﬁnal model produces sentences that are individually accurate, but they
do not make sense as a whole. Note that the ﬁnal model omits the parenthesized phrase ( left ) from its
second sentence.

Article:
( cnn ) ” it ’s showtime ! ” michael keaton paid homage – ever so slightly – to
his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third turn hosting “ saturday night live ”

this weekend . keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since

he ﬁrst hosted the comedy sketch show in 1982 . “ i had a baby – he ’s 31 . i also have

a new girlfriend – she ’s 28 , ” he said . fans who were hoping for a full-blown revival of

keaton ’s most memorable characters might have been a little disappointed . snl cast members
taran killam and bobby moynihan begged the actor with a song to “ play ” batman and
beetlejuice with them . all they got in response were a couple of one-liners . overall , keaton

’s performance drew high marks from viewers and critics for its “ deadpan ” manner and “
unpredictable weirdness , ” in the words of a.v . club ’s dennis perkins . fans also delighted
in a cameo from “ walking dead ” star norman reedus during weekend update . keaton scored

some laughs from the audience as an ad executive who ’s not very good at his job , a confused

grandfather and a high school teacher who gets asked to the prom in a riff on the romantic
comedy “ she ’s all that . ” other crowd-pleasing spots included a scientology parody music
video and a news conference spooﬁng the ncaa student-athlete debate . the show also poked fun

at cnn with cast member cecily strong playing anchor brooke baldwin . baldwin said on twitter

that she ’s taking it as a “ crazy compliment ” and shared a clip from the skit .

Reference Summary:
michael keaton hosted “ saturday night live ” for the ﬁrst time in 1982 .
in 2015 , his nods to starring roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” are brief .

Baseline:
“ snl ” wins “ saturday night live ” .
keaton acknowledged in his opening “ saturday night live ” .
keaton acknowledged in his opening night ’s “ UNK ” .
the show also pokes fun at cnn with cast member mariah carey .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
“ beetlejuice ” michael keaton paid homage to his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third
turn hosting “ saturday night live ” this weekend .
keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since he ﬁrst hosted the comedy
sketch show in 1982 .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
michael keaton paid homage to his roles in “ beetlejuice ” and “ batman ” in his third turn

hosting “ saturday night live ” .

comedy sketch show in 1982 .

keaton acknowledged in his opening monologue that a lot has changed since he ﬁrst hosted the

Figure 12: Baseline model replaces cecily strong with mariah carey, and produces generally nonsensical
output. The baseline model may be struggling with the out-of-vocabulary word beetlejuice, or perhaps
the unusual non-news format of the article. Note that the ﬁnal model omits – ever so slightly – from its
ﬁrst sentence.

Article (truncated): they are supposed to be the dream team who can solve the conundrum

of how to win the election . but david cameron and boris johnson were left scratching their

heads today as they struggled with a children ’s jigsaw teaching toddlers about

the seasons

. as the london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands , the prime

minister tried out what could be a new election slogan , telling him : ’ if in doubt , wedge it

in . ’ after being put right by a four-year-old who spotted their errors , the pair had more fun

ﬁnger painting with tory blue paint . david cameron and boris johnson were left stumped by
the puzzle at advantage children ’s day nursery in surbiton , as three-year-old stephanie looked

on . when they tried to put the puzzle back together , they hit trouble after it proved to be

more difﬁcult than expected . the conservative duo made their ﬁrst appearance together on the
campaign trail with a visit to advantage day nursery in surbiton , south west london . they were

supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare for 600,000 children aged three

and four . they sat at a table with joshua and stephanie , both aged three , and four-year-olds

hamish and leo where they broke up a puzzle which depicted the four seasons . when they tried

to put it back together , they hit trouble after it proved to be more difﬁcult than expected .

Reference Summary:
david cameron and boris johnson visit nursery to promote childcare .
duo left ﬂummoxed by jigsaw aimed at teaching children about seasons .
london mayor resorted to brute force to hammer wrong pieces together .
prime minister gave his approval , telling boris : ’ if in doubt , wedge it in ’ .

Baseline:
david cameron and boris johnson were left mystiﬁed by the puzzle .
they were at the nursery in UNK to promote a tory pledge to double free childcare for 25 children aged
three and four .
the pair were at the nursery in UNK to promote a tory pledge to double free childcare for children aged
three and four .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .
they were supposed to be highlighting tory plans to double free childcare .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
london mayor tried to hammer ill-ﬁtting pieces together with his hands .

prime minister tried out what could be a new election slogan .

but they hit trouble after it proved to be more difﬁcult than expected .

Figure 13: The baseline model appropriately replaces stumped with novel word mystiﬁed. However, the
reference summary chooses ﬂummoxed (also novel) so the choice of mystiﬁed is not rewarded by the
ROUGE metric. The baseline model also incorrectly substitutes 600,000 for 25. In the ﬁnal model’s
output we observe that the generation probability is largest at the beginning of sentences (especially the
ﬁrst verb) and on periods.

Article (truncated):
muhammadu buhari

lagos , nigeria ( cnn ) a day after winning nigeria ’s presidency ,

that he plans to aggressively ﬁght
corruption that has long plagued nigeria and go after the root of the nation ’s unrest . buhari

told cnn ’s christiane amanpour

said he ’ll “ rapidly give attention ” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria

, where the terrorist group boko haram operates . by cooperating with neighboring nations

chad , cameroon and niger , he said his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart

criminals and others contributing to nigeria ’s instability . for the ﬁrst time in nigeria ’s history
, the opposition defeated the ruling party in democratic elections . buhari defeated incumbent

goodluck jonathan by about 2 million votes , according to nigeria ’s independent national

electoral commission . the win comes after a long history of military rule , coups and botched

attempts at democracy in africa ’s most populous nation .

Reference Summary:
muhammadu buhari tells cnn ’s christiane amanpour that he will ﬁght corruption in nigeria .
nigeria is the most populous country in africa and is grappling with violent boko haram extremists .
nigeria is also africa ’s biggest economy , but up to 70 % of nigerians live on less than a dollar a day .

Baseline:
UNK UNK says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to destabilize nigeria ’s economy .
UNK says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals and other nigerians .
he says the country has long nigeria and nigeria ’s economy .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption in the northeast part of nigeria .
he says he ’ll “ rapidly give attention ” to curbing violence in the northeast part of nigeria .
he says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
muhammadu buhari says he plans to aggressively ﬁght corruption that has long plagued nigeria

.

he says his administration is conﬁdent it will be able to thwart criminals .

the win comes after a long history of military rule , coups and botched attempts at democracy

in africa ’s most populous nation .

Figure 14: The baseline model incorrectly changes thwart criminals and others contributing to nigeria’s
instability to destabilize nigeria’s economy – which has a mostly opposite meaning. It also produces a
nonsensical sentence. Note that our ﬁnal model produces the novel word says to paraphrase told cnn ‘s
christiane amanpour.

Article: cairo ( cnn ) at least 12 people were killed sunday , and more injured , in separate

attacks on a police station , a checkpoint and along a highway in egypt ’s northern sinai

,

authorities said . six people , including one civilian , were killed when a car bomb exploded
near the police station in al-arish , capital of north sinai , health ministry spokesman hossam
abdel-ghafar told ahram online . he said 40 people were injured . ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis

afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack , which came hours after another operation that
the group also claimed . in that earlier attack , a ﬁrst lieutenant , a sergeant and four conscripts
were killed when their armored vehicle was attacked on the highway from al-arish to sheikh
zuweid in northern sinai , the military said . two other soldiers were injured and taken to a
military hospital . ansar beit al-maqdis has claimed many attacks against the army and police

in sinai . a third attack sunday on a checkpoint in rafah left three security personnel injured

, after unknown assailants opened ﬁre at them , according to state media . the attacks come

as the military announced a reshufﬂe of several senior military positions , state media reported

. among those being replaced are the generals in charge of military intelligence and egypt ’s

second ﬁeld army , which is spearheading the battle against the insurgents in the northern sinai

. egypt ’s army has been ﬁghting a decade-long militant islamist insurgency , which has spiked

since the ouster of muslim brotherhood president mohamed morsy in the summer of 2013 .

hundreds of police and soldiers , as well as civilians , have been killed in militant attacks in

the past months . ian lee reported from cairo . anas hamdan reported from atlanta .

Reference Summary:
six people , including one civilian , are killed when a car bomb explodes near a police station .
six others are killed when their armored vehicle is attacked on a highway in northern sinai .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claims responsibility .

Baseline:
he says the attacks come after another operation that killed 12 .
the attacks come as military announced a u.n. peacekeeping force in northern sinai .

Pointer-Generator, No Coverage:
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .
the attacks come as the military announced a reshufﬂe of several senior military positions .

Pointer-Generator, With Coverage:
six people ,

including one civilian , were killed when a car bomb explodes near the police

station .
ansar beit al-maqdis , an isis afﬁliate , claimed responsibility for the attack .

egypt ’s army has been ﬁghting a decade-long militant islamist insurgency .

Figure 15: The baseline model fabricates a completely false detail about a u.n. peacekeeping force that
is not mentioned in the article. This is most likely inspired by a connection between U.N. peacekeeping
forces and northern sinai in the training data. The pointer-generator model is more accurate, correctly
reporting the reshufﬂe of several senior military positions.

